Skip to content
News
Announcements
From the President
In the Press
News & Stories
Briefs
 
Topics
 
Events
Submit an Event
Arts Calendar
 
About
Contact Us
 
Subscribe
 
Search
Open Menu Overlay
Emerson Today

Posted April 15, 2025 by David Ertischek In the Press
AI Can Help or Hurt When Making Self-Tapes, Says Weiss: Backstage
Eric Weiss headshot
If someone is using AI to create a self-tape for audition purposes, Director of Performing Arts Programming Eric Weiss said it’s important to be aware of how AI can help or hurt when making self-tapes.

“We really are interested in who applicants are as people,” said Eric Weiss MA ’01, MFA ’21 to Backstage. “Overly produced material can act as a barrier to getting a sense of who they are.”

Actors may make self-tapes for auditions to be cast in productions or to apply to colleges. But Weiss told Backstage that applicants should avoid AI-enhanced tools like using autotune.

But Weiss did point at ways that AI can be helpful for self-tapes.

“Any tool that actors can use to help organize the process is absolutely a good thing,” added Weiss.

Read the article on Backstage.

Categories

In the Press

Tags

Alumni, Performing Arts, School of the Arts


David ErtischekView All
Post navigation
Previous
Previous post:‘Stranger Things’ Have Happened: West ’25 Cast in Original Broadway Production
Next
Next post:Raynauld on Social Media, Marketing, Politics ahead of 2025 Canadian Election
Search
Search...
Search
Announcements
Winter Storm; Tuesday Schedule Changes for Boston Campus
Winter Storm Closure; Schedule Changes for Boston Campus
Winter Weather Advisory for Boston: Extreme Cold and Snow Sunday 1/25 – Monday 1/26
Emerson College Announces Housing Initiative with Wentworth Institute of Technology
Introducing New Leaders in Communications and Emergency Management
Strategic Planning
New Strategic Plan Lays Out Bold Vision for Emerson
Statement from the Emerson College Board of Trustees
Emerson’s Future: Two Days Left to Take Survey
Help Shape Emerson’s Future
Community Engagement, Data, Foundation of College’s Strategic Planning Process
Equity Announcements
Addressing Acts of Intolerance
Discover the Cultural Center: Your Space for Community and More!
Office of Equal Opportunity & College Policies
Upcoming Events
Feb
16
 Featured6:00 pm - 8:00 pm EST
Kindred/Kinship – Writing and Publishing from Abundance
Feb
17
 Featured7:00 pm - 10:00 pm EST
Cinema Emerson: “Redux Redux” (2025)
Feb
19
 Featured7:00 pm - 10:00 pm EST
Cinema Emerson: “Yosemite” (2015)
Feb
20
 Featured8:00 pm - 9:30 pm EST
ArtsEmerson Emerson Night: “The Things Around Us”
Feb
24
 Featured7:00 pm - 10:00 pm EST
Cinema Emerson: “Beautiful Was the Fight” (2024)
View Calendar
Emerson College
About Emerson
Emerson College is internationally recognized as the nation’s premier institution of higher learning devoted to communication and the arts. Learn more about Emerson College.

Contact
120 Boylston Street, Boston, MA 02116
617-824-8500

E-mail Emerson Today

Privacy Policy

Back to Top
Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram
©2026 Emerson College

Emerson Today AI Can Help or Hurt When Making Self-Tapes, Says Weiss: Backstage
Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram
Could not connect to the reCAPTCHA service. Please check your internet connection and reload to get a reCAPTCHA challenge.