Slatable's blue film camera Logo
Features
Premium
Plans
For Reps
Creators
Store
About Us
Support
Download Now
Self tape. Anywhere.
Even without a reader.
Learn more about the new SceneAudio AI 
A cluster of phones showing the apps Welcome, Scenes, Record Audio, and Teleprompter screens.
📣
Stop paying for expensive
self tape studios.
Get pro results without sweating every. Single. Second.

Empowering actors since 2016
Pollyanna McIntosh
The Walking Dead, Vikings: Valhalla, The Woman

Pollyanna McIntosh
IMDb
Slick, easy, reliable and professional. Slatable is my go-to for tapes...

Ellen Hollman
The Matrix Resurrections, Spartacus, Into The Badlands

Ellen Hollman
IMDb
The entertainment industry moves FAST and this app is the only one of its kind that can keep up...

Marc Crumpton
The Haves and the Have Nots, The Catch

Marc Crumpton
IMDb
This app is a no-brainer! Every actor eventually needs to put themselves on tape...

Features
Your best tape forward.
Slatable was created in collaboration with casting directors and professional actors. From file names to file size, we’ve ensured you’ll always have a professional edge when you send a self-tape with Slatable.

Super fast to set up Slatable lets you concentrate on your craft instead of the tech, so your performance is what truly stands out

Two phones showing both the Welcome and Edit Audition screens.
Phone showing the Takes screen.
Fast. Easy. Efficient.
No more juggling multiple apps to record, edit, and create a tape. Slatable saves you time by creating a seamless, submission-ready video.

Slatable keeps things simple, ensuring more time can be spent on your audition and the stories you want to tell.

Self tape without a reader.
Self tape audition without a reader? It happens. With Slatable's SceneAudio feature, you can record the other characters' lines in the scene and play them back when you record a take, eliminating the need for a reader.

With Premium easily control SceneAudio with a Bluetooth media button1. You choose when the next line starts and finishes (or even overlaps!), giving your audition a more natural flow.2 And with our new line by line SceneAudio you can easily record, edit and convert each line for the perfect performance.

Phone showing the Record Scene Audio screen.
Phone showing the Audition Notes screen.
Track and Repeat.
Slatable simplifies the process of managing your auditions. Track which casting director you submitted to and when you created the audition.

With Slatable Premium, our note feature ensures you remember every detail from audition to set. Plus, our powerful search feature, will keep you on top of every detail.

More actor testimonials
Alison Manheim
Alison Manheim
Instagram
I've been using Slatable since it launched and can't imagine taping without it...

Sharyon Culberson
Sharyon Culberson
Instagram
Slatable has helped me book a number of jobs in the 6 months I've had it...

David De Leon
David De Leon
IMDb
I’ve been using Slatable for many years now and it's helping me with my acting career...

Wahayn Inello Clayton
Wahayn Inello Clayton
IMDb
Before Slatable everything had to be done by me. So, with that said Slatable cut the shoot time for me...

Patrick Halloran
Patrick Halloran
 Website
It makes my life easier being able to combine a slate and audition into one nice video with transitions...

Slatable Premium
Fully self sufficient. Finally.
Compare Free, Basic and Premium plans 
Animated phone showing the SceneAudio AI voice changer.
Premium Features
SceneAudio AITM voice changer.
Record the other characters’ lines and change it to a voice of your choice. Matches your full performance and never sounds robotic. Sounds like another actor is in the room.2

Be fully self sufficient. Finally. With SceneAudio AI you can self tape on your own time, at your own pace with total control of your reader's performance.

🎁 Get SceneAudio AI with Premium.3
Stay on cue with the new teleprompter.
Slatable Premium's teleprompter was designed for actors like you. Seamlessly handle scripts in any format - import PDFs as text, PDFs with markup, even scanned scripts. Or copy, paste and write your own.

With teleprompter options built directly into the camera and as a standalone tool with beam-splitter support, you can tailor your setup to fit your needs. It's fast to set up so you can get to filming right away.

Phones showing the import script teleprompter view as the page is zoomed in and text has been marked up and the phone in portrait showing the text teleprompter
Animated phone showing Split Slate editing.
Pro-level edits without an editing app.
Slatable's editing features focus on self tape standards, making sure you look like a pro. Split Slates let you combine full-body and close-up slates into one video.

Import videos and photos for your tape, or store slates and headshots to add them at any time.

More Premium Features
Record/shoot in Portrait

From full-body slates that put the spotlight on you (and not your room!) to word-perfect TikToks with the teleprompter.

Play/Pause SceneAudio

Control the conversation by starting and stopping SceneAudio with a Bluetooth media controller.2

Line by Line SceneAudio

Made a mistake? Just re-record that line. Rearrange lines or convert them with SceneAudio AI for precise control of your audition.

Import Video

Import portrait and landscape videos shot on your device.

Transitions & Title Cards

Choose where to place title cards
and transitions or even remove them completely.

Media Galleries

Store headshots and slates to
easily add them to your title cards and submissions.

Multiple Scenes + Audio

Take your time to nail the scene.
Get unlimited Scenes and SceneAudio.

Save Individual Takes

Skip compiling large videos and save individual Takes to your device.

Choose the right plan
for your career.
Whether you're new to the biz, a rising star or a seasoned Pro,
we have a plan that will fit your self tape audition needs.

Compare Free, Basic and Premium plans 
Free
$0.00 / month
$0.00 / year
✨ New to the Biz

1 Audition/month

1 Scene/Audio per audition

3 Takes per Scene

Watermark on videos

Shoot in Portrait

sceneAudio AI

Compare Plans 
Basic
$4.99 / month
$59.88 $50.90 / yr 15% OFF
🌟 Rising Star

3 Auditions/month

1 Scene/Audio per audition

Unlimited Takes

No watermark

Shoot in Portrait

sceneAudio AI

Compare Plans 
Premium
$9.99 / month
$119.88 $95.90 / yr 20% OFF
⭐️ Seasoned Pro

Unlimited Everything

Control/import Scene Audio1

Save individual Takes

PDF/text Teleprompter

Shoot/import Portrait videos

sceneAudio AI3

Compare Plans 
🎉 Join our mailing list
Receive the latest updates, exclusive offers, and valuable self tape tips from Slatable directly in your email inbox!

Email address
Your email address
  
Frequently Asked Questions About Self Tape Auditions.
1. Requires pairing a Bluetooth media button to your device. Sold separately.
2. Slatable Premium subscription required.
3. For a limited time, sceneAudio AI will be included at no additional cost in all Slatable Premium subscriptions.
Slatable
Features
Premium
Plans
Community
For Reps
Creators
Store
Support
Help Center
Contact Us
About Us
Download
App Store
Slatable logo
We care about the protection of your data. Read our privacy policy.
We don't sell your data to third parties. Opt out anyway?
Consent Preferences

Made with  in Hollywood, CA.
© 2026 Slatable, Inc. All rights reserved.