love it!!!! seee what more you can do  go through thisn incredibly thorughly wnd also truly getnwhat it is were doing and so on and so forth https://design.google/library/gemini-ai-visual-design  Skip to content  Community About Ten Years of Material Google Design Google Design is an editorial platform about design at Google. We open a window for designers and the design-curious to meet the people and processes behind the products.  Discover Material Design Google Fonts The Keyword Connect Instagram YouTube X Privacy & Terms Illustrating the Gemini App   Illustrating the Gemini App How dynamic cues help users discover, learn, and master our AI assistant’s evolving features  How do you build trust in a tool that’s always evolving? Our AI assistant, Gemini, is constantly learning and adapting, which means traditional design methodologies (mostly linear, predictable, and rooted in control) have to be set aside.  Our designers took on the challenge of charting a new digital landscape. How do you bridge conceptual gaps around AI, especially around how Gemini simplifies information and expands ideas? How do you invite users to explore, play, and search, so they can build confidence using an ever-shifting tool? These questions were guided by a core set of goals: to make Gemini feel intuitive, immersive, approachable, aspirational — and, above all, trustworthy.  While Gemini’s sparkle icon may be the most ubiquitous visual element within the Gemini brand, there are many other elements of the product’s illustration system to be explored. In this deep dive, the designers behind the system pull back the curtain to reveal gradients, responsive containers, and intentional motion that seamlessly work together to create a sense of magic, clarity, and familiarity within the Gemini experience.  A history of fluidity: Lessons from the past A video showing a spectrum of light forms, transitioning from white instructional shapes to vibrant, multi-colored expressive gradients   A range of light densities were explored for different use cases.  Navigating uncharted design territory isn’t new. Consider designer Susan Kare, who pioneered the original Macintosh interface. Using simple visual metaphors, she made abstract digital processes tangible and intuitive for new users: a trash can, a paintbrush, a smiling computer face. Her icons weren’t just pixels; they were bridges between human understanding and machine logic. Gemini faces a similar challenge around accessibility, visibility, and alleviating potential concerns. What is Gemini’s equivalent of Kare’s smiling computer face?  The design team landed on gradients, which gently guide users into the new collaborative world with Gemini. It’s an amorphous, adaptable approach, unlike the static nature of past digital assistants (many of us remember Microsoft’s Clippy), yet it inspires a similar sense of discoverability. Gradients might be much more about energy than “objectness,” like Kare’s illustrations (a trash can is a thing, a gradient is a vibe), but they infuse a spirit and directionality into Gemini.  A solid blue pill shape centered on a vertical line representing a pressed power button state. A soft, diffused blue gradient glowing from a power button icon, suggesting an active, energized state. A solid green curved shape nestled in the bottom-left corner of a frame, indicating a swipe gesture. A vibrant, multi-colored blurred shape pulsing from a corner, representing an active swipe-to-activate gesture.   Simple sequences were explored to guide users toward activating Gemini. These included pressing and holding the power button or swiping from a corner.  Spectrum shift Gradients are central to Gemini’s visual storytelling, acting as context builders that guide users through the product experience. Designed to convey a transfer of energy and directional momentum, they feature sharp, almost opaque leading edges that diffuse at the tail, acting as clear visual pointers to direct user attention toward what’s most important.  To make the system feel alive, our designers wanted to visualize Gemini’s process of active thinking and synthesis, which helps personify the AI assistant rather than rendering it impenetrable.  Side-by-side dark panels showing a flat blue base gradient and a vibrant, multi-colored undulating wave Concentrated and diffused gradients are used when transcribing voice.  Stacked, glowing blue radial arcs ripple and fade against a black background to simulate active voice waves   Directional gradients imply human input, capturing energy flow from the user into Gemini.  Foundational shapes Gemini’s visual language needed to support its own identity while integrating with Google’s existing aesthetic. The design team looked to the company’s familiar logo for inspiration, focusing on the fundamental shape of the circle. This choice was deliberate, as circles tend to convey simplicity, harmony, and comfort. Even Gemini’s own logo is thoughtfully constructed from the negative space of four adjoining circles.  We explored several foundational shapes to represent Gemini’s “thinking state,” drawing heavily from Google’s design heritage. We experimented with the iconic four-color dots — a symbol of the brand’s rounded, optimistic language — and various Material shapes historically tied to voice and Android’s system UI. By leveraging these established elements, we were able to ground the new framework in a familiar history while ultimately evolving them into a more dynamic, fluid expression of AI intelligence.  Four small circles in Google’s signature red, yellow, green, and blue aligned horizontally on a black background The iconic four-color dots serve as a reference point for Gemini's rounded, optimistic language.  Soft, glowing organic shapes from Material design system in yellow, pink, and red with blurred edges Material shapes are softened and blurred to take on an ethereal quality.  A series of morphing, multi-colored gradient shapes—including circles and stars—depicting Gemini’s dynamic thinking state   A series of fluid, morphing shapes depict Gemini’s "thinking state," evolving from established Material elements.  Many of Gemini’s interface elements, such as buttons and containers, echo the circle through their rounded corners. These subtle visual cues bring continuity with other Google applications. But perhaps the most impactful use of the circle is how it contains and sculpts Gemini’s signature color gradients. Here, shape acts as a dynamic vessel, concentrating energy into a sharp point before allowing it to blossom outwards—a visual metaphor for Gemini’s ability to process and expand ideas.  People expect consistency from digital systems; they want to learn once and apply that knowledge repeatedly. The challenge for the Gemini illustration team has been to cut through that dynamism, creating a new, yet familiar, visual language.  The illustrations are meant to have a “warm, spatial, rounded quality,” says Anna Sera Garcia, design lead. “We’re always considering how to depict our UI in a way that feels optimistic, delightful, playful, yet also sophisticated. There’s something ethereal — that kind of in-between fuzzy space that reflects our nonlinear process for ideation.” The aim was to make sure the illustrations felt intuitive and frictionless, which is crucial for a product like Gemini that’s so new, revolutionary, and always changing.  Intentional motion Movement in Gemini is not merely decorative; it’s an essential guiding element. Each animation has a defined start and end point, creating a sense of directional flow that mirrors user actions. This sense of responsiveness helps users intuitively understand that the system is working with them. Inner activity within the motion conveys thinking, analysis, and intelligence, making Gemini’s processing feel more transparent. Motion allows users to see information coming together, visualizing Gemini’s conversations and listening abilities.      “Whether it’s introducing haptics or subtle shifts in how we communicate, the aim is to make the interaction feel easy and intuitive for users,” says Garcia. “It’s interesting to look back at how technology has shaped the ways we converse and learn. We’re trying to unlock those foundational principles that feel intuitive for this new set of interactions.” These principles work as context builders where one thing leads to the next, helping users feel guided rather than lost.  Embracing softness in the face of change Gemini’s solutions feel cool, calm, and considered, by concealing the struggles and challenges of their creation. Garcia notes, “There’s a sense of play and camaraderie that happens when brainstorming, knowing deliverables will change.” Our onboarding illustrations are constantly being refined, building on the elements that already exist.  This process highlights the importance of a foundational experience that forgives mistakes, anticipates confusion, and invites exploration. When a system is hard to approach, the design must be soft. This softness — conveyed through guided, pulsing gradient shapes, clear language, and transparent signaling — allows users to engage with the new system feeling secure and supported. The gradient can be many things through its animations: aspirational and uplifting, directional and instructional. But they remain soft and direct, and always looking forward; they’re deeply connected to the Google brand with room to grow, like the personified gradient, rippling and responding to voice.  A phone screen showing a Gemini icon transforming a blank page into a structured outline with purple gradients   Soft gradients and pulsing shapes create a calm, secure space for information absorption and creation.  The designer as cartographer Designing illustrations for Gemini is like charting a continuously evolving map. Designers aren’t creating a fixed tool; they’re rigorously composing a relational experience that adapts as much as it informs. How do you build trust with a tool that won’t look the same tomorrow? The user doesn’t need the system to be perfect. They need it to be thoughtfully imperfect — and this, now, is the designer’s job, as we move into future evolutions of Gemini.   Special thanks to Buck, our creative partner and agency, Ivan Witteborg, Namroac Doan, and Andy Stewart for their contributions to this work.  Contributors  Anna Sera Garcia  Staff Visual Designer  Link   Olivier Gillaizeau  UX Design Manager  Link  Related Unboxing a New Collaboration If hardware and software can work together, so can their teams  Conversations Material Design Three hands hold color swatches, a smart phone, and a smart watch next to each other to compare colors UX Design as Dance Theater Just like dance, great product design thrives on iteration, collaboration, and attention to detail  Perspectives UX A series of 12 figures, made of tiny blue dots, changing from defined shapes to blurry ones When Brand Fonts are Open Source Discover why brands from IBM to Github open up their fonts to everyone, and how you can reap the rewards.  Perspectives Typography Explore the endless design possibilities with Google Fonts’ open sourced brand fonts Inside M3 Expressive Go behind the scenes with product, research, and design.  Podcasts Material Design Inside M3 Expressive Better, Easier, Emotional UX The research behind Google’s bold new direction for design  Perspectives UX Better, Easier, Emotional UX Rethinking Color Theory How to balance the emotional and rational to create powerful palettes  Perspectives UX Horizontal gradients transition from scarlet to purple to greenish-blue. Always Read the Comments How harnessing user feedback helped make Material 3 the world’s most popular design kit  Perspectives UX Happy, sad, and neutral faces over comment bubbles and UI buttons Evolving Lookout A progressive approach to designing accessibility apps  Perspectives UX Playful colors become recognizable objects in a phone app All That Sparkles Is AI Researching the rise of Google’s twinkling AI icon  Perspectives UX 6 system icons, each with an AI sparkle, including a play button, microphone, magnifying glass, edit tool, globe, & file upload YouTube’s New Hue The story behind a brand-new brand palette  Conversations Art Direction Sizzle reel of the updated brand identity. Beauty Across the Board Rich Fulcher on game design, UX systems, and beautifying Google products  Podcasts UX Beauty Across the Board When a New G Passed the Squint Test “We nicknamed it the Super G” — Gaja Sidrys Caple  Perspectives Oral History Google logo, google dots, headshot of Gaja Sidrys Caple United by Design Adrian Secord on breaking silos (and metaphors) to build better UX  Podcasts UX United by Design When the Design Kit Went Dynamic “With great impact comes great responsibility” – Euphrates Dahout  Perspectives Oral History When the Design Kit Went Dynamic When M3 Made Us Question Our Assumptions “Let’s see how far we can go” – Ayan Daniels  Perspectives Oral History When M3 Made Us Question Our Assumptions Good Vibrations A multisensory journey through Material sounds and haptics  Spotlight UX Good Vibrations When Motion Got Principled “It’s a guide for how to do guidelines” – Sharon Harris  Perspectives Oral History Sharon Harris and Material 2 sliders. Code and Creativity Will Larche on the synergy between design and engineering  Podcasts UX Code and Creativity When Google Home Got Personal “Material made the system better for all people” – Miche Alvarez  Perspectives Oral History A black-and-white headshot of Miche Alvarez overlaying overlaying a screengrab of the Google Home app. When the Nitty Gritty Was a Big Deal “We were extremely nerdy about super tiny details” – Philippe Cao  Perspectives Oral History Philippe Cao Still When We Had Two Weeks to Redesign Google “It looked more Google than Google did” – Robert Wong  Perspectives Oral History When We Had Two Weeks to Redesign Google Material Eras Exploring the evolution of Google’s open-source design system  Perspectives Oral History Material Eras When Material Made its Global Debut “I think we’re working on the biggest design project in the world” – Zach Gibson  Perspectives Oral History When Material Made its Global Debut What it Takes to Make FAB Components Bethany Fong on tactile design and the thrilling early days of Material  Podcasts Oral History What it Takes to Make FAB Components Facing our Interfaces Matías Duarte on why the only limitation for design is imagination (...and battery life)  Podcasts UX Facing our Interfaces The Goal Behind the Goal Compassion comes first for the Google Fitbit UX team  Conversations UX The Goal Behind the Goal People + AI Research A collection of content on machine learning from Google’s PAIR team  Spotlight AI People + AI Research Artistic Intelligence How creatives translate complex concepts into visual languages  Spotlight AI Artistic Intelligence I Was Meant to Be a UX Researcher Eshita Priyadarshini’s Indian joint family prepared her for a career at Google  Perspectives Career ux-researcher_3X2.png Why Google Needs UXEs User experience engineers occupy an ever-evolving niche at Google  Perspectives Career Black and white illustration of various shapes and scribbles Privacy & Terms