WeAudition Logo
Get an Instant Scene Partner through video-chat
Make money being a Reader
 WeAudition Laptop and Phone 2022
Featured in logos


Join the Community of Professional Actors & Industry Experts to improve your career, make valuable connections & raise your game.



“Having a strong reader can make the difference between a good tape and one that books. ”

Ramani Leah, CSA Casting Director

Random Reader Reviews from last 24hrs: (Fri 20th Feb 2026 )

4 hours ago
 Lovely reader and human! thank you so much Deanna, I hope to work with you again soon! 

 
3 hours ago
 Tori is genuinely so great! Gave some really helpful notes and just great energy overall :)) 

 
12 hours ago
 JD was incredible, and not just saying it to say it. He gave me some stellar notes and suggestions for a comedy audition that brought it to the next level. Appreciate the big help man! 

 
2 hours ago
 Gina is suuuuper sweet and so easy to read with! She is very supportive and lets you do your thing! Highly recommend! 

 
16 hours ago
 Zgjim was really great on helping me with ideas and has a very patient and calm presence. 

 
3 hours ago
 Craig is always fantastic. Really helped with technically challenging scenes and has great instincts to work off! thank you 

 
7 hours ago
 Sara was so great to work with! We had so technical issues, and she was more than accommodating. Looking forward to reading with her again! 

 
About an hour ago
 Robert is so lovely to work with! Relaxed, great notes, I hope we cross paths again! 

 
About an hour ago
 Great reader with comedy pace and confidence - so easy to knock out a fairly intensive scene because she\'s a pro! 

 
About an hour ago
 Christopher was awesome - he was willing to do a many extra reads for us to get it right and gave me awesome ideas for new takes. Highly recommend! 

 
In the last hour
 Jhanelle was so helpful and really gave lots of insight into a scene I was finding really challenging to work though. Thank you again! Hope to work together again soon :) 

 
15 hours ago
 Kristen is a wonderful wonderful actress and reader! So in the moment, emotional, present, and giving! Love reading with her! 

 
2 hours ago
 Amara is so grounded and jumps right into the characters to play. Thanks for helping me run lines. 

 
17 hours ago
 Terry is a fantastic reader! He had some great feedback on how to bring a little more life to my scene :) 

 
2 hours ago
 such a great reader! he really helped me break down the scene with fresh perspectives/insights! 

 
8 hours ago
 Jon-Mykul's a great actor. Quick to the text, relaxed and positive attitude. Highly recommend! Thank you! 

 
6 hours ago
 ALEXANDER WAS AMAZING! Such a great reader, provided feedback when asked and it enhanced the scene! Great energy as well! I was super comfortable, thank you Alexander! 

 
3 hours ago
 Amazing reader. Very patient with great tips. Also helped me with my British dialect. Will definitely be reaching out again. I has so much fun working with you! 

 
21 hours ago
 Britt is a great reader. Always gets the tone of the scene. And very supportive too! 

 
18 hours ago
 Jordans a great reader. Nice voice and quick on the tone. Give her a call. 

 
5 hours ago
 By far best reader I\'ve encountered - stellar working actor with great read and great notes (if you want them) - honestly would love to find a project to work with her on! You should def work with Christy! 

 
2 hours ago
 It was so wonderful working with you! Thank you for your time and all your feedback, it was all very helpful!! 

 
19 hours ago
 Arron is the truth. I had a quick turn-around and he really helped me dig in to the meat of the scene to make a good take great! Such a fun scene partner and talented actor. Will fave and book again. 

 
17 hours ago
 I had a great time working with TJ, he was able to get some great takes right from the first read 

 
22 hours ago
 Can't stress enough how helpful Lois was. Highly recommend to anyone seeking a great reader. 

 
+ PLUS MANY MORE



s
“AWESOME. I LOVE the platform! I had the BEST time meeting actors from all over the world via WeAudition.”

Erica S. Bream Casting (Altered Carbon, Colony, House of Lies)

 
“Very easy to use and a great way to access actors from all over the world. Couldn’t recommend it more highly.”

Aisha Bywaters Casting (Black Mirror, Peaky Blinders)

Get A WeAudition Self Tape Reader On Demand
A Professional Self Tape Reader via Video Chat Provides:


The ability to rehearse and learn lines with someone experienced
Get honest coaching and advice on your performance
A professional Reader helps you connect emotionally to the scene
Save yourself time and money
Record when you are ready at a pace that suits you


Be comfortable and prepared in your own space,
but with interaction and direction, creating a better experience and stronger relationships.

Efficient
Tape as soon as you are ready. WeAudition lets you get readers instantly for self-tapes instead of pulling favors - cutting travel costs for all. Readers are available 24/7 on WeAudition. Having a professional help you with feedback helps you get a better take without having to rush.

 
International
Grow your network, and deepen relationships by meeting quality casting directors, other actors and industry experts globally via WeAudition. You’re personally connecting to the global industry in an instant.

 
Cast your Reader
Make a better impression with a professional actor reading in. Need a Texan accent? Maybe a specific Reader for your romantic scene when only a family member or your roomate is available? Cast your Reader to suit the role via WeAudition. You will be amazed what a difference it makes!

 
Safe
WeAudition video chat is safer than meeting in-person, with less risk of inappropriate conduct and social distancing as standard! Plus your personal contact info isn’t shared.

 
Green
By using WeAudition, our in built video-chat and digital files / scripts, you’re cutting down on waste, driving less and reducing pollution.

 
Profitable
PLUS you can earn as a Reader on WeAudtion when you are not auditioning. Use your talent to make money as an extra bit of income.

Greg Apps
“It's the Digital Age and WeAudition are embracing it beautifully. This truly is an amazing platform for the industry.”

Greg Apps Casting (Mission: Impossible II, Chopper, Wanted)

WeAudition Events
We hold events across the world introducing members to agents, managers and casting directors and hold panels, & mixers during the worlds most prestigious film festivals.





100+ events in more than 30 cities
WeAudition hosts regular event throughout the world’s top acting & entertainment industry hotspots.

Our loyal, engaged attendees include:

WeAudition Members
Celebrities & Public Figures
Award-winners (OSCARS / BAFTAS / EMMYS)
Models & Influencers
Casting Directors, Agents, Managers
Trade Press & Photographers
Strategic Industry VIPs
   
Global Community Events
WeAudition hosts regular event throughout the world’s top acting & entertainment industry hotspots. We also strategically collaborate with leading celebrity functions & industry festivities.

Film Festival Parties
Networking Mixers
Panels & Seminars
Expos & Conferences
Exclusive Screenings
Awards Dinners
 

“I’ve been saying we need this for years - and here it is!”

Amanda Lenker Doyle Casting (Black-ish, The Muppets)
 
“I love what you do & whole-heartedly, unreservedly endorse WeAudition. It’s a great, clever, inspiring system. An incredible resource that I believe may well be the future for casting.”

Sophie Holland Casting (The Witcher, Wednesday, Down A Dark Hall)
 
“What a brilliant platform, simple and easy to use even for a technophobe like myself.”

Lou Smernicki (Kate & Lou Casting)
 
“The process is smooth and user-friendly. I highly recommend this as a way to quickly and easily see talent no matter where they are based.”

Rachel Reiss (Liz Lewis Casting Partners)
Jason Kennedy - Casting Director of NCIS
“I truly think every actor would benefit from using it to prepare for auditions, create self-tapes with live readers, get industry advice, meet Casting Directors & expand their network. I have never gushed about a platform like this before.”

Jason Kennedy - Casting Director of NCIS


Earn By Being a WeAudition Reader
WeAudition has THE BEST Readers. We love you all!
Many Readers earn hundreds per month. Some Readers earn thousands per month.
You can also earn by referring other actors to the community.








“WeAudition is awesome. I get to practice acting every day, make money doing it, and network with amazing people. What’s not to love?”

Steve Shermett, Actor (The Chosen)



WeAudition on a laptop
Find quality Readers to rehearse & self-tape.
Connect instantly on video-chat with actors & coaches.
Some Readers are free, others have a fee.

Earn money being a Reader for others.
Whenever you’re available, log on and help other actors.
Some Readers are earning $1000s a month.

A Professional WeAudition Profile.
A full profile including photos, reels, links, credits and reviews at no extra cost.

+ other resources, offers & exclusive actor tools for a successful career.

 

“A great website… where you can hire someone to run lines with you before an audition or be your scene partner when you self-tape. Wish I’d thought of it!”

Marci Liroff Casting (ET, Indiana Jones, Footloose, Mean Girls)


Aisha Bywaters Casting
“Met some great actors today for generals using WeAudition. Very easy to use and a great way to access actors from all over the world. Couldn’t recommend it more highly.”

Aisha Bywaters Casting (Black Mirror, Peaky Blinders)

 Nancy Bishop Casting
“It’s a super useful and unique actor platform. I am particularly impressed with the ‘find a reader on demand’ option.”

Nancy Bishop Casting (Borat sequel, Mission:Impossible)

 Erica Arvold Casting
“WeAudition was easy to set up, intuitive to use and I can’t wait to conduct more meetings on this incredible platform. Highly recommended!”

Erica Arvold Casting (House of Cards, Turn, Lincoln)

 Andrea Bunker
“What a fantastic way to meet new actors on a busy day! The platform was incredibly easy to navigate & get started with. Very excited about it!”

Andrea Bunker (Big Little Lies, Sharp Objects)


“WeAudition completely takes the stress out of self taping for both actor and casting director. And the fact that you can adjust the reader volume, even after you tape is absolute genius. They’ve truly thought of everything. It’s an incredible platform.”

Ramani Leah, CSA Casting Director (The Casting Director's Cut)
WeAudition Community Values
Our values stem from our roots of our founders and the origins of WeAudition when it was a group of like-minded actors in Hollywood helping each other run lines for auditions and selftapes. The Community has grown to be the worlds biggest service for self-tape readers on demand, whilst still retaining the values of Community spirit, all rising togeher, supporting and championing each other's success.

Members create BETTER self tapes, leading to booking more work as an actor. The ability to EARN as a reader helps our members create and maintain a sustainable career as a performer. Making money from their talent.

Inclusion
Aspiration
Success
Diversity
Wellbeing
Talent

If you have the talent and you are on the road to professional success as an actor, wherever you are in the world, we welcome you to JOIN US.






“She's kind, she's a great reader, plus she really understands the scene and gives GREAT feedback. It was truly a pleasure to work with her and will book her again. NEW FAVORITE READER!”

 
“Sabrina is great and helps get you comfortable and gives very good suggestions to improve your scene. Patient, helpful and makes it all about you!”

 
“Hunter was incredible, offered great advice and helped make the performance much better. Highly recommend, she's every actor's, actress.”

 s
“Matt was super lovely and professional. He not only helped me rehearse my scenes, he also gave advice and was very encouraging. Thank you, Matt! :)”

 s
“Kadia is a wonderful actress and coach. She was generous with her time and gave me so many great tips on how to make my scene come to life off the page. I will work with her when I have the chance to again. Book her :)”

 s
“WOW! What a gracious and generous reader. Madeleine is an excellent coach and gave me great tips and direction, when I came with little because of time restraints. Will definitely book again. Be sure to book her if you see she's online!”

 s
“So great to work with! REALLY insightful notes on the sides we worked on... really helped me see where I need to tap in more and spend more time on!”

 s
“I had an awesome session with Greg! I was feeling alright about my audition before, but now I feel really prepared and excited. He really helped me develop the character and make sense of scene. Thank you so much!.”

 s
“Kristina was a great reader, very easy to work with, patient, gave me excellent feedback when I asked for it. I felt like I was able to do solid work that I am proud of. ”

 s
“She is an amazing reader, she helped me re-interpret the script, which gave my audition a whole new dimension! Thank you.”

 s
“Cedric is an amazing reader who takes the time to make sure you're set.”

 s
“Can't recommend highly enough - accent work, scene breakdowns. One of the best on this site for a reason.”

 s
“Shelley is so helpful, kind and insightful! Such brilliant suggestions for how to interpret lines differently and locate the pivotal moments! Thank you so much Shelley!”

 s
“Thanks Jason! Great reader with excellent insight. I highly recommend.”

 s
“Loren was great! She gave me some really good suggestions that gave my scene more depth and direction.”

 s
“Katherine is absolutely lovely! She jumped right into the scene and helped me knock out a last minute self-tape. Thank you!!”







“Enlightening & absolutely worthwhile. WeAudition is on the leading edge of the future of auditioning.”

David Stieve, Agent (AKA Talent)
 s
“Nothing short of AWESOME if you need help self-taping or running lines. A great way to meet a growing number of Casting Directors in LA and other major markets”

Carrie Park, Agent (Park Artists Group)


Products & Features
Get a Selftape Reader
Earn as a Reader
Actor Meditations
Actor Journals
Latest Events
Event Photos 
Company
Terms
Privacy Policy
Testimonials & Reviews
Contact Us

 
Membership & Support
Account Login
Actors & Readers Signup
Members FAQs
FAQs for NON-members
Tech Support
Reader Notification Help

   
Download on the App Store


© Copyright WeAudition Inc. 2015 - 2026 Patent Pending

