logo
Find Jobs
Find Talent
Resources
Agents
NewGrow with UGC
Join
Post a Job
Sign in

Content For:Actors + PerformersBrands + CreativesCreatorsCrewVoiceover
Categories:
Topics:
Specialties:
Mediums:
Series:
Actors + Performers
How to Avoid Making Self-Tapes That Look AI-Generated
By Alex Ates | April 10, 2025
Article ImagePhoto Source: Westend61 GmbH/Alamy Stock Photo
Is the actor on that self-tape the real you? Or could they be mistaken for a concoction cooked up by generative artificial intelligence? With publicly accessible tools out there that can conjure realistic human faces and voices, actors may be tempted to use AI to simulate or enhance their recorded auditions. In an era when self-taping has become the norm, this presents a major worry for casting directors and college admissions officers alike. 

Join Backstage to access jobs you can apply to right now!
“During COVID-19, there was a necessity for more schools than ever to do prescreen auditions,” says Gigi Watson, the director of My College Audition. “Many programs that hadn’t required them before liked prescreens and didn’t get rid of them. It’s a critical—and increasingly competitive—first step to getting seen.” With that in mind, she stresses that “colleges and institutions must stay vigilant” about watching out for AI-generated videos.

Whether you’re auditioning for a college drama program or a professional production, here’s how to make sure your self-tape looks like the genuine article.

Get Cast Today
Gain access to the best platform for performers and build your career on Backstage.
Join Now
Showcase your humanity.
“We really are interested in who applicants are as people,” says Eric Weiss, the director of performing arts programming at Emerson College. “Overly produced material can act as a barrier to getting a sense of who they are.” This means it’s imperative to avoid using AI to auto-tune your voice, enhance your appearance, or smooth out minor mistakes. 

“I’m always looking for: Where does the imperfection come through? Because that’s what makes it relatable,” says Joe Salvatore, the vice chair for academic affairs at NYU Steinhardt’s Department of Music and Performing Arts Professions; he’s also the director of the school’s Verbatim Performance Lab.

RelatedHow to Make a Perfect Self-Tape
How to Make a Perfect Self-Tape
 
Prioritize your performance over flashy video production.
Though it’s tempting to amp up production values on your self-tape, this can easily backfire. Remember that CDs and college admissions officers are assessing your acting skills, not your technical flair. “ Many of the best prescreens are filmed at home, with not a lot of money spent on equipment or anything fancy,” Watson says. “Make it as easy as possible for auditors to quickly and fairly evaluate your talent.” 

Know when to stop. 
Generative AI can build on itself endlessly, resulting in videos that feel eerily perfect—a quality that doesn’t exist in real life. So don’t waste your time (or sanity) obsessing over making your self-tape look flawless.

Watson advises her clients to spend no longer than an hour recording. “Set a timer, do the thing, and then stop. If you want to do it again the next day, you can; but I encourage students to give themselves one hour and three chances max. If you’ve prepared your material well, that’s all you should need.”

There can be a place for AI in your prep work. 
“There is an organizational role for AI to play,” Watson says. “The number of requirements [for college auditions] has become so cumbersome. Many students are paralyzed by the mountain they have to climb just to get their audition organized.”

Weiss agrees. “Any tool that actors can use to help organize the process is absolutely a good thing.” This could mean using AI to keep track of deadlines and application requirements or even to research the given circumstances of a monologue.

Ultimately, Salvatore says, “It’s about academic integrity. You have to present yourself in a true way that is authentic to you.” 

This story originally appeared in the Apr. 10 issue of Backstage Magazine.

CD Judith Bouley Shares Self-Tape Advice for Actors Auditioning From Home

00:01
/
68:22
TAGS 
Actors + Performers
 
Audition Advice
 
Auditions
 
Education
 
Advice
 
Artificial Intelligence
 
Acting
Get Cast Today
Gain access to the best platform for performers and build your career on Backstage.
Join Now
Auditions & Open Casting Calls
New York AuditionsLos Angeles AuditionsLondon AuditionsAuditions for MoviesSee all Auditions
Featured Calls
Social Media Ad
Construction Shoot, UGC Male
Social Media Ad
UGC, Plus-sized Male
Social Media Ad
Organic Daily Gut Tonic UGCSearch all Calls

Casting Calls Straight to Your Inbox
Stay informed with Backstage Daily. Get exclusive content, the latest casting notices, and advice to advance your career.

Email Address
Sign Up
FOR FINDING JOBS
Actors & Performers
Voiceover Artists
Creatives & Production Crew
Influencers + Content Creators
Models
Search Casting Calls
Popular Auditions
How it Works
Advice & Guides
Backstage Kids
Community
Acting Monologues
Online Classes
Create Your Free Talent Profile
Buy Backstage Magazine
FOR FINDING TALENT
Film, Video & TV Production
Theater & Performing Arts
Voiceover Production
Commercial + Branded Content
Influencers + UGC
Vertical Series
Companies & NGOs
Talent Database Directory
Talent Database
Pay Talent
How it Works
Advice for Creators
Post a Job
COMPANY
About
Careers
Partners
Sitemap
Articles Archive
Group and School Subscriptions
SUPPORT
Help
Contact
Pricing
Advertising
Report Content
CONNECT
Facebook
X
Instagram
Tiktok
YouTube
Podcast
CHOOSE LANGUAGE
English
GET THE NEWSLETTER
Enter email
Submit
GET THE Backstage IOS APPGet the iOS app
Cookie Preferences
© 2026 Backstage. All rights reserved.
Terms of Service / Privacy Policy
Backstage icon in footer
The most trusted name in casting since 1960.
Made in Brooklyn, NY at home
