0:00
Building a website for your startup is easier than it's ever been. The hard part is creating a unique brand that
0:06
really stands out. So today we'll be joined by Kari Sarinin, co-founder and
0:12
CEO of Linear to review your websites with an eye for what makes a memorable
0:17
brand. Welcome to another episode of Design Review,
0:27
Ki. Thank you so much for joining us. Well, great to be here. So, you were the first designer at Coinbase and you were a lead designer at
0:33
Airbnb before ultimately starting linear as co-founder and CEO. I'm curious, what
0:39
have you learned about how to build a strong brand when you're you're looking at your website? One of the first thing I would say that
0:45
it's it's something that it should be authentic to your company. I think these days maybe a lot of startups look at I
0:52
don't know stripe or some lower linear or some some other company out there and they they think like okay this is the
0:58
the way to build sites or this is the way to build your brand none of those companies started that way like stripe
1:04
were first website was very different than the current website um as as well as their product and similar with linear
1:10
like the first website was very different than the the current website. So I think like you you should understand like what stage of a company
1:16
you are and like what kind of people are you trying to find. These days there's
1:21
maybe this trend of and like because it's easy to build websites you might try to like build very polished or fancy
1:28
websites very early on. But what that kind of like tells you is like it's maybe sets the wrong expectation for the
1:33
user that if your product is just that I don't you build it last month and like
1:38
you don't have everything figured out yet the product might not be there yet. it's not that polished. It might be set
1:45
this as wrong expectation that this is a very I don't know like polished product
1:50
already and it does all the things that it you promise it does. So I think like there there's the danger that you go too
1:57
far like trying to look like a large company or like a mature company too early. So I thought like maybe it would
2:03
be interesting just look at what was the linear website initially and what it is today to kind of like highlight this
2:09
like difference. Love that. Let's let's take a look. I built the first linear website from the the the way back
2:15
machine and um in some ways like I would say like I don't know the website is fairly simple like it's not it doesn't
2:21
look horrible but also I think it's it's something like we created in basically one day we didn't want to spend weeks or
2:29
months trying to create a website where we think like the actual the effort should be put put into the product itself in some ways like we the the some
2:36
of the things with the the brand or with the even the copy is that we we wanted to use this issue tracking term because
2:44
like if if you go to any large company website like you go to Slack or you go
2:49
some other productivity app website it often says something like this is the work platform or this is the where the
2:55
work happens or something something very vague right and I think like that comes later when you're trying to build this narrative
3:01
but in the very beginning what you're trying to sell is you try to find someone to actually use your product and
3:07
like just understand what it is so what we did here was that We wanted to put the issue tracking. We knew that that
3:13
wasn't the in like long-term vision for the product or the company, but we
3:18
knew that that's like something that the people we are looking for. It's just early stage companies and engineers will
3:24
understand like this is issue tracking is a is a technical project management in a way. It doesn't attract people that don't
3:31
know what issue tracking is. So, it sounds like with the copy and specifically your headline, you honed in on like the specific phrase that your
3:38
ideal user would resonate with and be like, "Yes, I'm looking for an issue tracking tool." Rather than, "We're
3:43
building a work platform, blah, blah, blah." Where people would say, "I'm not looking for a work platform. I'm looking for an issue tracker."
3:49
Yeah. And I think it's it's the way to think about it. It's like you're trying to maybe filter out people. You should
3:55
be very specific initially and maybe like try to like you can talk to
4:01
investors in very ambitious ways. You can say like yeah this is going to be the work platform of the future but like
4:06
on the website you can just put like this is a chat app and like this is a nice chat app and
4:11
like just do that. That's such an interesting point which is it sounds like what you're saying is like own being small, own being a
4:17
startup and there's a lot of advantages that come with that rather than trying to pretend that you're some big company.
4:22
Um, and that will set better expectations with users and more resonate with them. And it's also interesting that a lot of the times
4:29
during YC, we spend a lot of time working with companies on their two sentence description, how they describe themselves. And often times we say that
4:36
there's usually two different two sentence descriptions. There's the one for investors, which could be, you know,
4:41
the big, you know, ambitious sounding thing, and then there's the one for your users where you want to use specific
4:47
language that will resonate with them, maybe jargon that investors wouldn't understand. And so it's really
4:52
interesting you're saying focus on that customer two sentence description, that customer pitch, and like really put that
4:58
right front and center. Yeah. And like I just we don't have to go too much in in the design itself. Like I I kind of like use this
5:04
screenshot to show like hey there is some kind of product even though at this time we didn't really have it ready but
5:09
if we were working on it. So there is some kind of product. It kind of looks nice. You can still bit see like what the features might be but it's a little
5:15
bit faded. So it's a little bit mysterious. So, it's like kind of like curious because in the end what we want people to do is put their email here and
5:22
like sign the join on the wait list. That's so interesting because a lot of times I think people put a screenshot on
5:27
and they just put the literal screenshot and a lot of times it doesn't work because people are not familiar with the
5:32
app and you're not trying to communicate all the different features and everything like that through this. You're just trying to kind of build
5:38
mystery and be like this looks like a modern tool. You should check it out more. Yeah. Yeah. So I think like it's it's very like simple message in the end and
5:45
I think like we we also like went very simple with the rest of the sites. It's like okay it's like fast because that's
5:51
one thing we heard heard about a lot and after superhuman we were one of the products to add this like command menu
5:57
that like also makes things easier and we we showed like oh it's like connects with your some of your tooling that you already use and okay here's the team and
6:04
like we have some like this is not some random people but we have like built other things in the past. Um so it's
6:09
very very simple. It's one page. There's no other pages. Um, we're not telling,
6:14
we don't have a about page and all kinds of we don't have a blog and like we don't have any anything really. I think
6:20
for us it was just like let's just put something out there to capture people that um are potentially interested. Show
6:27
that we're pulling something new but not ex kind of explain too much what it is. Yeah. And so this was like a week of
6:33
work or something like that. Yeah. Like a couple days. Couple days. Yeah. This was how many years ago? This is 2019. So
6:38
Okay. So, six years ago and so now it's evolved a bunch because the products has
6:44
evolved and what you do has evolved and you have a lot more customers and connections and integrations and the product and everything. So, I'm curious
6:50
to see the latest version now. I think this maybe like a third evolution of the of the site and um like the second one
6:56
was the kind of famous purple website that was like like replicated a lot uh
7:01
across the companies and I think with this like okay yeah you can see that the the title is different because the
7:07
product is actually doing more so so it's not just issue tracking but we think like there's this building part
7:13
that has multiple different kinds of features or workflows you can use and then there's the planning part which is
7:18
also that the planning like the road maps approach projects that you can write project plans and but we still
7:24
like like to keep it pretty clear like here we say like issues projects and product road map so it's not like again
7:30
it's the language that technical teams would use and yeah like I think visually it's like we went more this kind of
7:37
black and white we try to make it a little bit mature in a way like from the the purple from the past like we still
7:44
have like nice effects and like we we like doing this that they they kind of signal that we care about the
7:51
experience and that's that's kind of like why we do this and but it's it's more there's now more information. We
7:58
try to to explain some of the what you can do with it and and we're still like
8:04
pretty direct that these are like yeah you can do analytics and you can do like
8:09
uh different we have different kinds of features. So in the end like I think it's it's something that you should
8:14
think that the the website that the brand always evolves with your company and your customer base. So even now like
8:21
we have more larger companies enterprises. I don't want to turn into like a fully
8:26
like enterprise oracle like company like a brand or something but I do still have to think about it's like is this
8:33
something that fits to the the current customers. I think one of the interesting things to me comparing both
8:39
the original one from six years ago and this one now is how like you've resisted
8:44
the urge to make it overwhelming people with features and you know obviously the
8:50
product has grown a lot your customer base has grown a lot the company has grown a lot and I think a lot of times
8:55
the temptation is to want to throw more and more stuff you know on the page to communicate that to anybody who's coming
9:01
here and it seems like you've actively fought against that to try to keep it that same simple kind of ethos that you
9:08
had when you launched, you know, six years ago. The way I think about it, the landing page, the first the homepage is kind of
9:14
like the the front page. So like you can't explain everything like you can't explain all the features, you can't explain all the customer stories and
9:20
everything. That's why the there's other pages on the on the in the website. So we now have specific sections for
9:26
specific pages and sections for the the areas of the product. So you can go deeper in it. So I always think like the
9:33
homepage should be for the people who don't really know about you. So it should give you some kind of enough
9:39
information that you know that is this interesting or not but not too much so that you get overwhelmed and not too little that you
9:46
don't understand what it is. So you have to find that kind of balance. Well, it's awesome to get a sense for how you think about this in building
9:52
your own product. Should we take a look at some uh YC submitted websites and give some feedback? Yeah, let's do.
9:57
Okay, so first up we have Sprites AI. Let's take a look. Build custom AI workflows and streamline
10:04
growth. Very interesting. What's What's your initial impression? These graphics
10:11
certainly stand out in their style, right? My initial reaction is like I'm not just looking at this. I'm not exactly sure
10:18
who is this for and what can I do with it. Um so it says about like build
10:23
custom AI workflows and streamline curls. So, so in some ways like okay
10:28
like I I can understand there's some kind of workflow but for what like is it for designers is it for
10:34
um engineers is it for like YouTubers there's something there's a there's a
10:40
card about YouTube there so and streamline growth is well there's all kinds of growth like revenue growth
10:46
and user growth there's marketing and so I I would like probably like go a little
10:51
more specific on on the on the copy here that there is some kind of templates I guess for different kinds of workflows.
10:58
It's kind of like a random list of different kinds of workflows. So it would if it would be like meaningful to
11:04
or like useful to group them somehow that hey there's workflows for I don't know like YouTubers or there's
11:11
workflows for business people or some kind of analysts or something. So there's a little bit more like oh okay
11:16
I'm not a YouTuber but like I'm an analyst so I I could look into this. Yeah it seems like the who it's for is
11:22
missing here. The interesting thing for me is I paid so much attention to the
11:27
graphics because they're so unique that I didn't even notice that it was like brand mood board generator, interview
11:32
questions predictor, social media ads generator. Like I think they're trying to tell us some of the use cases that
11:38
you could use it for, but my brain just didn't even notice those because the graphics just took all of my attention.
11:44
Yeah. Yeah. And I think like well there's this movement in the background and the movement on the cards which I think can be nice but it might not be
11:50
the best thing to have this looping movement in the in the landing on in the
11:55
first screen because maybe what happened to you is like you're kind of kind of focused on the movement and like
12:01
what's coming up next and like I think like the website should be kind of like this almost like this pyramid of
12:08
like you start with this is what it is and then it's like it's very like as simple as possible and then you keep
12:14
going down, it's like expands and like okay well there's this thing and that thing and there's more more and more things. So like oh okay like I can
12:21
that's interesting I will take a look but the first thing should be like very like kind of pointed or clear.
12:27
Yep. Yeah. There's like good animation which draws your attention to um
12:32
important things that you want users to pay attention to or notice and then there's distracting animation that maybe
12:37
takes away attention from whatever you're trying to focus on. There's also this interesting element here which is
12:43
the prompt kind of like it's some kind of prompter. Yeah. Which is interesting but like I just wonder it's like kind of floating here
12:49
and you might think it's this looks like a cookie banner in a way because that's a good point. It just kind of floats
12:54
there. It's not it's it's like you kind of often often ignore that. So, I just
13:00
wonder if if you just would put this prompter on the page here at the top and
13:05
and it it could kind of like tell people, yeah, just like try it out and that way like you could communicate it
13:11
better. Yeah, it's so interesting like you're not designing in a vacuum of your page. You're designing in the context of what
13:16
users are used to. And if users are used to ignoring cookie banners and things like that that tend to pop up at the
13:22
bottom, then like maybe they're just ignore your thing there, too. I mean those kind of banners like the the UI
13:27
itself like this could work in the product itself like when you're when you're looking at the like a page or
13:33
some kind of document like it it could be nice to have this like a floating thing but in the website context it
13:38
feels like it's a some kind of banner that I don't have to pay attention to. Okay. So uh we scroll down a little bit
13:43
start building from a template. So these look like I think the same kind of templates that we're scrolling across
13:49
maybe slightly different. And here we've got some more categories of types of things. business marketing, AI
13:55
generation, image generation. Um, okay. So, that's interesting. I
14:00
think one of the challenges when you have like a generic workflow builder, something that can do anything, it's
14:06
difficult to communicate the specific things that people should use this for. And this seems like an interesting way
14:11
to do that. Um, to give, you know, jog people's memory of like what what do I need? What workflows do I need to solve?
14:17
People probably have a hard time thinking about that, but just like, oh, do you need to create an infographic then? Oh, yeah. That's something I would
14:23
use this for. Maybe my biggest question here is like what is this workflow? like uh so it's
14:28
not so there's a lot of this um there's this promotion on the templates that you can have different kinds of templates
14:34
but I don't think the page um exactly describes how does it work
14:40
like it might be worthwhile try trying to add some kind of almost like a flowchart not really but explain that
14:47
what it like take one example and then like kind of like blow it up a little bit like this is what a workflow could
14:54
look like hey there's like other workflows we created, but like I guess maybe you can
14:59
create your own too. Yeah. And so I think it's kind of highlighting the the use case.
15:04
Awesome. Well, thank you Sprites AI. This was uh really interesting. Really appreciate you submitting your site.
15:10
Okay. Next up, we have Giga ML and they came to us with the question um our website conversion rate is low. How can
15:16
we improve that? Well, I guess the first question is like what are they trying to convert people to? And I see two buttons
15:22
that say book a demo. So, my hunch is that's that's the goal here. They're trying to get funneling people to the
15:28
website. Maybe they're doing cold outreach. Maybe they're doing other types of marketing or something. And then they're trying to get people to
15:34
book that demo. Um, says AI agents for enterprise support trusted by some of
15:39
the most admired companies in the world. And then there's a glowing blue orb here. I don't know what's what's your
15:46
first impression. In some ways I think it's like quite quite clean and and uh I think it I don't know fits well for the
15:54
for the market which is an enterprise and I would just say that like the reason the conversion is low because
16:00
you're going after enterprises and it's like there there's probably no way to like increase that conversion flow like
16:06
the conversion rate really because enterprises are not necessarily coming to websites and clicking buttons that
16:12
much. I do think like if you do want to have more users or more people coming in, you probably should have a way for
16:18
them to try it out themselves and and like kind of drop the demo. If you think like you still want to go full
16:24
enterprise, I think this is fine. But then you I think you just have to find those enterprises somewhere else like
16:30
you have to do sales or some some kind of events or some kind of like dinners or some kind of ways to connect with the
16:36
enterprise people because they are not often evaluating tools randomly. Maybe
16:43
sometimes they hear about it like maybe you do some press or you maybe do something something else. the conversion
16:49
rate doesn't really matter because the if you sell if you do one deal that's
16:54
probably going to be like a huge deal. It is interesting. They do have a demo here. So, this is a little small and
17:00
it's hard to read this thing, but the animation did draw my attention to it. So, let's see what happens when we click
17:05
on this. Hey there, I'm Giga ML's voice AI agent
17:10
ready to chat about anything. Do you have something in mind? Uh, tell me about enterprise support.
17:17
Our enterprise support is all about making life easier for big businesses.
17:22
We offer seamless integrations with platforms like Amazon Connect, Genesis,
17:28
and Salesforce, so everything just works together. Our voice AI handles massive call
17:35
volumes without breaking a sweat. Okay, so a couple interesting things here. First of all, when she started
17:41
talking, she basically just said, "What do you want to talk about?" And I was like, "I don't know." Um, so
17:47
it it might be better to start off with a prompt that could lead people to what um they want them to ask about, which
17:54
could be features of the product, things like that. Um, another thing that I noticed is when she was describing the
17:59
features of the product, she described it as S2 type 2, which you know, most people know
18:05
it's like sock 2 type 2 is how it's described. So, um, just making sure that like that's actually communicating the
18:11
right thing. um if I'm an enterprise user and you know one of the first things I do is talk to this thing to see
18:17
how well it works and it gets things wrong or something like then I'm nervous that like oh maybe I don't want to use
18:23
this product. So I think steering people towards the conversation you want them to have with it that's most going to
18:29
upsell them would probably make them more likely to want to book a demo and use it in their own company. Yeah, I would say like on the ORP it's
18:35
it's hard to see the icon in it. It's it's kind of gray. So I I I kind of knew
18:40
something was happening, but from the side here, I wasn't quite seeing the the icon. So that that might be one thing if
18:45
people are not that's something like you could track if people actually click that and like interact with it. And I don't know if you need to worry about it
18:51
too much, but just just see if if it it could be like useful to like improve it. And maybe I don't know if this element
18:58
is the best like maybe it could be maybe there could be like more like a box or something. It's like
19:04
maybe the box could have some prompts or something to like show the use cases. Set prompts. Yeah. Like kind of well enterprise customer
19:12
support or enterprise um like I think that the agent like the they um the agent kind of describe like
19:20
maybe a lot of things they do and I think again it goes to like what are these people looking for? So if I'm an
19:26
enterprise buyer and I don't know the CEO tells me like we need to reduce the cost and like we want AI support like
19:33
what do I type in like what do I support like AI phone support or something and so kind
19:40
of like trying to think like what is the language these people are using and then try to put that language here so you are
19:48
like aligning with what they're looking for. Yeah I totally agree the headline AI agents for enterprise support is very generic. I think the word enterprise is
19:54
important. We clued in on that. Um, but the sub headline there, trusted by some of the most admired companies in the
19:59
world, is a missed opportunity to literally describe what the product does and more about specifically enterprise
20:06
is the big thing like specifically who within enterprise should be the person that cares about this
20:12
and then you know they say trusted by the most admired companies in the world and then they go right down and say
20:17
trusted by these great. It's like you don't need both of these. So there's a missed opportunity here to communicate more.
20:23
I mean, I would say like it's I don't know if it's like super honest to say like these are the most admired
20:29
companies in the world. Um like the I think it's good that there are obviously seems like they're big companies, but I
20:35
would say like in my mind there's other like I don't know Apple is very admired company or something. It's like
20:40
I don't know if that statement is exactly true. Yeah. But this statement is true that this these are probably like great companies.
20:46
So I think that's fine. Yeah. And then coming down here, voice AI that is human. So it is voice tune.
20:51
You know, it's all about voice stuff, but like nothing up here says voice. So that's probably a missed opportunity to
20:57
really target who your early adopters are going to be. My understanding with enterprise buyers is that they they need
21:04
a lot of almost like I think you need need a lot of materials. You need a lot of text. You
21:09
need to check a lot of boxes. Yeah. You need a lot of customer stories. like there's a lot of things they they want to see and maybe you
21:17
shouldn't put those things in like the front page, but maybe there's a specific category like maybe you have a specific
21:22
page about security, maybe you have se specific page about something else. You could still when you email them you can
21:29
link to those materials and then once they're on the website you can kind of like they can like travel around. Yeah.
21:34
And so I think there is some benefit of adding things on the website but I I wouldn't consider this is a like a
21:41
consumer startup where you you are trying to optimize for the conversion rate. It's very different kind of
21:46
business. Awesome. Thank you. Giga ML YC's next batch is now taking applications. Got a startup in you?
21:53
Apply at y combinator.com/apply. It's never too early and filling out the
21:58
app will level up your idea. Okay, back to the video. Okay, next up we have Unreal Milk. So, this one seems very
22:06
opinionated. We've got um a cow that's chilling on a chair on my forever
22:11
vacation. Um we got some handdrawn clouds in the sky. It's interesting when
22:17
I look at the cow, it's not immediately obvious what it's communicating, but when I think about it for a second, I'm
22:23
like, "Okay, so the cow doesn't have to produce the milk all day every day." And and so we have milk that is not real
22:29
milk, which is what the product is here. I'm assuming it's definitely a different kind of category that I'm used to. I would say
22:34
like from this screen. Yeah, it's it's hard to tell like well what is it? Like
22:40
I mean it's unreal milk. So that's the only information so far we have. So it's not milk but like what is it made of?
22:46
It's not real milk. Yeah. So maybe we need to maybe we need to Okay. Like so it's has a side growing.
22:53
Okay. So then we move into to some some kind of use cases. So you
22:59
can make cheese and ice cream. So we're still not sure what it is, but it's all all good things kind. They're
23:06
pitching us on like why it's good, why it's better. Uh okay. All right. A lot of personality here.
23:12
Mama, we need you. And the cow's crying. And then our way.
23:18
Yeah. Our way. There's some kind of container where the milk comes from. Um yeah.
23:23
Uh okay. So there's some actual pictures. Okay. Okay, we got some scientists in a lab.
23:29
Uh, so yeah, this kind of reads like a nice story and finally they did it. They they
23:37
created the whole cow milk and lap. So it's kind of like grown y grown milk.
23:43
Yeah. Okay. Yeah, there's a lot of personality even the copy like down here we are moving towards a more sustainable future. This
23:50
definitely has like a fun playful brand. Um, seems like they don't take themselves too seriously.
23:56
It is interesting that you talked about um on storeshelves because I feel like on storeshelves you would expect a
24:03
bottle that's more like these bright colors, the bright yellows, bright blues, that kind of stuff, but it actually feels very black and white if
24:09
that's the actual container right there. Um I wonder if their website, which honestly I think is pretty memorable. Um
24:16
I think I would remember this later on. The sides scrolling is unique and memorable. The graphics and
24:23
illustrations are unique and memorable. this doesn't feel like it's copying anything that I've seen before. It feels
24:28
like they from first principles came up with the concept of this. Um, which is something that I think helps make it
24:34
feel more memorable. A lot of times, um, a lot of websites are kind of cookie cutter and it's almost a meme, you know,
24:39
in the design community around like all websites look the same and, um, I don't know, got to give them a lot of credit for trying something different here to
24:46
to try to stand out and be Yeah. And obviously it's like it's not a product you could sign up to. So, right.
24:52
So it's it's it's something you have constraints you have to buy. I wonder okay well there is navigation. So I didn't I wasn't expecting
24:58
I would not have clicked on I would not have known that was I was like well what do I do now? So I I was definitely looking for what is the
25:05
next step or well actually what okay it doesn't really do it just like scrolls scrolls you to the thing. Yeah.
25:10
So what I would have wanted that is that okay this is in a way it's an
25:15
announcement but well if I want to buy this like is that possible right? How is it in stores? Where can I find it?
25:22
Yeah. So, I think it's it's it's like a nice announcement. I would consider how
25:27
effective this will be. Maybe later they will have to think like how do you actually explain this or like a little
25:34
bit explain more, right? Um go deeper into some of these things, right? Yeah. It's very interesting. There's no call to action that we could
25:41
find. This is almost like an old school like the early days of the internet. People took the medium that already
25:46
existed like books and magazines and just tried to like make that a website. Um, and obviously websites have become
25:52
way more interactive now. Um, but this feels like an old school like it's almost like a magazine,
25:57
you know, display or ad or something like that. Yeah. Know, maybe the last thing I would say like maybe just add some kind of
26:02
call to action. Maybe just add like enter your email to to join like some
26:08
kind of mailing list. Um, just like people who like if people land here like even if that not that many like people
26:15
sign up, you could start some kind of community. Maybe you have a lot of people like students signing up or you maybe have someone else signing up and
26:22
then you can start seeing this patterns of well who who are who is signing up and then you can ask them like why did
26:28
you sign up like why is it interesting and then you can kind of like start the conversation. Yeah. Um I think like with these kind of
26:34
things they seem to have this like a like a more like a broader social mission or kind of like a just cause
26:40
that we should to live in a world where we don't have to like use the animals this way which is I think something like you
26:46
could do more here is that hey join this cause like we could change the world kind of that that and then
26:52
that's the call to action join the mailing list we can I don't know send you some updates we
26:58
can talk about different things and so people who are interested in that cause join it. The font choice feels very opinionated
27:05
too. I'm curious your thoughts on that and and how you think about uh choosing fonts to communicate part of the brand.
27:11
Yeah, I think like I think a font or a tie face is very very big thing on any website because websites in the end are
27:17
textual. So there's text on websites like this this website doesn't have a lot of text. I do think like their font
27:22
choice is good here given the the style of it. It's more like handdrawn kind of environment. In other websites, I would
27:29
just think that again like what is the what what is the world the brand is living in and like what kind of
27:35
signaling you want to do. Sometimes you want to do the serifs or some of the like more like retro or older kind of
27:43
feeling to it or sometimes like a lot of more modern kind of geometric type faces. It's more
27:49
like the the kind of like the standard of the day and that's like considered modern. Then there can be like more
27:55
futuristic type faces. And it's not like you should just use one type face everything because in small sizes a lot
28:02
of type faces don't work. You you probably have to use something fairly standard so people can read it. But for
28:08
headlines and special points you can you can pair it with something like more unique.
28:14
Very cool. All right. So from the founders they have a question. Does the website leave a positive impression and recall for the
28:19
brand? Well yes I would say so. It felt very organic, I would say. Um, which is
28:26
interesting because their product is not literally organic. It's created in a lab. Um, but it seems like what they're
28:32
trying to communicate is that this is just as organic as real milk and not filled with a bunch of chemicals and
28:38
it's good for you and stuff like that. And I feel like this font choice feels very organic, like handdrawn,
28:43
handwritten. Um, the illustrations and the graphics feel that way. The colors are very colorful. So, yeah, this this
28:49
feels very memorable. Like I feel like I will remember this site a week from now. Mhm. I think the organic thing is interesting because technically this is
28:56
a very like a scientific thing where where you're creating something with with
29:02
science. Yeah. Which is not organic per se. Um it's it's like you could go a direction of
29:08
Jurassic Park or something and like you you make it like super like scientific. But they they they did like what I think
29:15
is the right way is to to try to like battle that feeling. I think people have
29:20
a little bit uneasiness of manufactured foods. Yeah. And so you try to like battle that
29:26
feeling like hey like there's a reason for this and like we're trying to like communicate like we do want to like provide you safe and I don't know good
29:34
food but or nutrients but like it's it's there's a different method to it. The
29:39
font is very like handdrawn here but then the brand on the bottle or the the the logo itself is very normal. It's
29:45
like I don't know if it's Helvetica or what, but like it's the website is very fun and playful and the bottle is not.
29:50
Yeah. Missed opportunity to communicate that there. Thank you, Brown Foods. Appreciate you
29:56
submitting the site. Okay, next up we have Confident AI. Let's take a look. The LLM evaluation and observability
30:03
platform for Deep Eval, built by the creators of Deep Eval. Engineering teams
30:08
use Confident AI to benchmark, safeguard, and improve LLM applications with best-in-class metrics and tracing.
30:14
Well, I would say like there's there's a lot of like specific words here and I I think potentially is a good thing for
30:20
for this market. Like you are selling this to some kind of expert or like a LLM expert and or a company and and I
30:28
think it's fine to use those like it's a good thing to to use the words. Um I I
30:34
would say like I generally get what they're doing. I'm not exactly maybe like have the specifics of I I don't
30:41
know this specific category that well I my one my first question is like well how is this different from something
30:47
else or something like is there something specific about this that makes it so good other than it's built by the creators of
30:54
deep level like well I don't know what that is so I'm not maybe getting that sense of like what is
30:59
this really good at or what would it who would this exactly be for or like what
31:05
is special about it or Yeah, minor note, and maybe this is just because I'm old, but the purple with the underline, it
31:13
reminds me of the early days of browsers and the internet where the default visited link color was like that purple
31:19
with an underline. Well, I I really thought it was a link. I I thought it was going to link somewhere and and I I would say that
31:25
like it it is too dark, too. It's it's kind of it disappears into the background. So yeah, I also I don't know like why why is it
31:32
in a different color and why evaluation and not observability in that color. Yeah. So
31:37
yeah. Okay, let's scroll a little bit. All right. So this feels like linearesque where we're starting to get into the product a little bit here. Like
31:44
a big screenshot. Yeah, I think this looks nice like you can see like oh there's this platform I can I can use and I can look at like oh
31:49
it has different kinds of features and Yep. And then open source and trusted by top companies. Okay, cool. A lot of
31:56
GitHub stars. Okay. So, it seems like we're talking about um the deep eval open source product here with some of
32:02
this to build trust, which is good. If you've got a lot of users for um the open source version of this, then that's
32:08
a good way to build trust. Uh build your AMO to eval. Okay. So, it seems like it's really focused on eval. Yeah, I
32:15
think one of the tricky things is a lot of times people will scroll and just kind of like read the headlines and decide if they want to dive in deeper on
32:22
the smaller text. And if I just read that like build in a weekend, validate in minutes, I'm not exactly sure. Make
32:28
forward progress always. I don't exactly know what those things mean. So I think it's helpful sometimes
32:33
when building a site to, you know, do an exercise or just go down just read the headlines. And does that communicate
32:38
everything that you want to communicate to the user? Yeah, I think some of those headlines like yeah, the make forward progress is
32:44
a little bit vague like it's without I think it could be like a little more clear. I don't think you should like
32:49
make compare it to yourself to the competition like directly like say like
32:54
hey we do better this and that like or something like that but like I think you should look at like what are those companies saying how do you actually
33:01
different from those company like what and then like try to highlight those like benefits or special this you have
33:08
so like rather than saying like well we do evils but like maybe you can say like we do it differently because of these
33:14
reasons or something. like how do you differentiate yourself? Sometimes there's not that much competition. Maybe there sometimes there
33:21
is a lot of competition. So you should like make try to think like what is our lane here? How could we make it like special some
33:28
way or something differentiated and then try to like weave it into the website or
33:34
into copy or into the graphics or or something. Yeah, that's a great point. Especially as a small startup, you can't be the
33:40
best at all the things that all users will care about. And so I I think to your point earlier around trying to find
33:46
your early adopters, just trying to figure out what's the one thing that we want to be better than everybody else at. And anybody who cares about that one
33:52
thing, they're going to choose us. And it seemed like for you in the early days with linear speed was like one of
33:58
the big things, you know, that stood out to me on your site. And so, you know, I could imagine you in the early days, I'm curious if this was
34:04
explicit, just saying like, look, for anybody that cares about speed for their issue tracking tool, we want to make
34:10
sure they're going to choose us. We're going to be the fastest. people care about other things, like cool, we'll get them later, but our early adopters are
34:15
going to be the ones that care about speed. Is that how you thought about it? Two things. One is like that the speed was one of the main problems we heard
34:22
from a lot of people we talked to that they just don't like the tools because they're slow. And it makes sense like is
34:28
kind of like this pretty it's like almost like an email client. Like you use it a lot and it's like annoying if it's if it's slow. But I do
34:36
think like you probably know it's like who who cares most about speed like startups do? People move fast. Yeah. So
34:41
those people like we want to align with those people. We wanted to get the startups. So but like what startups
34:47
don't need is complexity. So you try to find like the the things that your product aligns
34:53
the most with the people you want the first and then later like yeah like enterprises kind of care about speed but
34:59
they also care about complexity and processes and things. Yeah. So those things come later but like yeah you
35:05
should think what are some of the things or the one thing that your first type of like ideal customer and then in the
35:12
beginning especially like how do you make the website to talk to those people and if you don't know then you can go
35:19
talk to them. It's like why would you pick this product or why would why why did you pick this product and then see
35:24
if there's some kind of pattern there. It's like well I like like it because of these reasons and then like we'll put those reasons on the web page so like
35:30
maybe you can find more of them. Okay. Okay. And so we have a question from uh the confident AI team say the feedback we'd like is whether you know
35:36
what we do within the first 20 seconds. We have an open- source and closed source product. So it can get confusing.
35:42
I think we understand what they do with it's a eval and observability platform for deep eval. Um, but it took us a
35:49
minute to try to understand that deep eval like it was the um the GitHub link
35:54
in the top right that says deep eval next to it that clued me in that deep eval is probably their open- source
35:59
thing and that this is confident AI is their their paid product on top of it.
36:05
Um, so I think we figured that out but it probably could have been more explicit. Yeah. I mean like my first reaction with
36:10
DB all just made me think of Deep Mind or something. It's like is this like another company they built before or or
36:16
what? So it's like it's it's like maybe it should say that this built by the creators of open source something deep
36:24
like so something like make it I don't know if it's necessary but I think it could have been helpful for me to to
36:30
understand like is it a company is it a open source library is it something is it a technology I don't
36:35
know what it is. Yeah. And maybe the other interesting point here is um maybe that's their initial wedge is they're
36:41
just looking for the people that are already using DPV val. And if you come here and you don't know what DPV val is, like move along. You're not the early
36:47
adopter and the early adopter are the people that see DP val and go oh I'm using DPV val and I should be using this too.
36:53
Yeah. Yeah. Maybe it's the website is like well DPL hosted and then and maybe you have like well how maybe
37:00
the site then tells you well how does the platform expand on the open source? like maybe there's some additional
37:06
things they do. So it's like all based on the like the first version like obviously you can change the website
37:11
later but like this first version could be just like well hey if you using deep dile currently here's how we can make it
37:18
better. Thank you confident AI website looks very professional. All right next up we have Dropback. Let's take a look.
37:25
Dropback is front office tech for elite college programs and they raised 1.6
37:32
million. All right. Congrats. Uh, Dropback is revenue sharing software for elite collegiate teams combining back
37:40
office operations with front office strategy. Okay, very interesting. Um, this almost feels a little bit like, you
37:47
know, the bright colors and uh the gradients around the buttons and um you
37:52
got like a moving grid behind like there is a lot going on here. What's what's your initial impression on the brand
37:57
side of this? Well, I mean like I like that they are quite clear what they do and so I think that's good. Um yeah,
38:04
maybe the backgrounds and the and the graphics here like a little bit like are they really needed and especially at or
38:12
at least at this front section. So I think like the moving graphic is probably not meaningful because it's
38:18
making hard to read the text. Yeah. Um yeah, if that moving grid went away, I don't think anything would be lost. In
38:24
fact, it might be gained. Yeah. So, the Dropback team actually submitted a question. They said, "Our landing page feels chaotic, but there's
38:30
so much information we need to share. Our customers are not tech-savvy. Football coaches sometimes assume if
38:36
they don't see it, we must not support it." Okay, so this is interesting. They're targeting a non-technical audience. They feel like it's chaotic,
38:42
but it seems like they feel like they got to stuff everything into this front thing that's the first thing that people see, and that users will never scroll.
38:49
Has that been your experience? I think these days people are pretty used to to scrolling. like even on your phone like you're constantly scrolling
38:55
up and down and and and so I don't think it's necessarily a problem. Yeah. If if you have that kind of feeling that you
39:01
need to share a lot, I think it's fine to share it like down the page. You just you don't have to do everything at the
39:07
top. I think the top should be just again like fairly simple that this is this is what we do. Maybe this text
39:14
could be even bigger. I I feel find it it's a little bit hard to read and it's like quite small and I think you're just
39:20
trying to quickly explain like what it is. I also think like just that the yellow color is a little bit again like
39:27
I think there's not enough contrast. I think yellow is a hard like you should go darker with it or not use yellow
39:33
because it's a little bit hard color to use for button. I think this like for example this logo logo logo logo like
39:39
documents I don't know what I don't know what would anyone think about that. Yeah, I can't tell what's happening there, right? I I do think like there's
39:45
some like yeah these these could be like moderately useful to to show there's some kind of charts and things but um I
39:52
would just say like keep the the homepage like the front like the top fairly simple. You have the video here
39:59
which I think like it's quite short. Um so I wonder if it's I mean it's it's
40:04
showing some stuff so I think that's good. So I think like you're already like telling people what's in it and
40:09
yeah you are like clearly like demo kind of like demoing the product. So, I think you don't have to use those graphics up here. I don't know if there's anything
40:15
like you would want to add there. Like maybe there's some maybe there's the grid, but like don't don't make it moving or maybe there's some like other
40:23
shapes around it. But I I would think like these these kind of people who are not techsavvy, they're not necessarily
40:28
looking at the most like amazing website. something like for example at Coinbase when I was working there. I
40:34
think that I I found that like that the job I had with the brand or with the with the design itself is like creating
40:41
trust and because you are dealing with money and cryp cryptocurrency back in 2014 wasn't what it is today and like
40:48
even today there's still trust concerns. It's like can I trust this company to hold my money and so
40:55
sometimes you can you don't have to try to do everything with the website. You could have like few things that you
41:01
really want to do and in I don't know this audience but it could be that they just want to see something trustworthy
41:09
and you should just signal that like this is trustworthy we have to kind of like the features you need. Sometimes
41:15
you can make pages very feature based or you can make them customer based or use
41:20
case based. So depending on your company like what might I don't know what makes sense like our page is fairly feature
41:26
based because I like that because I think our audience is fairly like technical
41:31
and so they they kind of know a lot of stuff and they they often look at the features and they like to to look at
41:36
those kind of things. But if these people are not technical maybe they just want to know that their problems will be
41:42
solved and or something or that like other companies are other people like me are using it and like I should have
41:47
their faces there saying something. Yeah. the social proof, right? Yeah, it's interesting as they scroll down, they do get into the specific
41:54
features and um you know, I think this helps to communicate. I mean, the yellow
41:59
seems to be the brand color. It keeps coming up here. Yeah, I think I think yellow is good, but it's like maybe not the best
42:04
background color. Um but they uh they did what you suggested here, which is the black text, which I
42:09
think makes it a lot more legible, but then these, you know, the white text, white logos are harder to read. There's
42:14
also like a lot of automatic movement on this page which I I do think like adds to the chaos. So
42:20
there could be some of that but like I would like like basically every section is almost like moving and so I think it's yeah like there's
42:27
again moving videos so I would maybe like try to reduce that
42:32
if possible. Um this page is very long too. Yeah, sometimes it's okay but uh if if
42:37
this user base like likes it but the other way to do this is like you just create other pages. There's currently a
42:43
lot of space in the navigation that you could say like for college
42:49
programs for I don't know coaches or something like you could make very clear like targeted pages for specific people
42:56
or specific use cases and so because people often might look at the navigation and then they're like oh like
43:02
I want to see what that is. So so I think there's that kind of opportunity too. Yeah, seems like these just link further
43:07
down the page and take you down there. Awesome. Well, Dropback, thank you so much. Um, this is a really cool product.
43:13
Thank you everybody who submitted websites. Uh, super interesting to take a a brand look at a lot of these. Uh, we
43:20
haven't really done an episode like that before. And of course, thank you Takari from Linear. Uh, incredible feedback.
43:25
Really appreciate you come joining and uh and helping out here. Yeah, thanks. That that was fun. And we will see you on another episode
43:32
of Design Review.