Skip Navigation
Design
Overview
What’s New
Get Started
Guidelines
Resources

Getting started

Foundations

Patterns

Components

Inputs

Technologies

6 items were found. Tab back to navigate through them.


Filter
Navigator is ready
Human Interface Guidelines
The HIG contains guidance and best practices that can help you design a great experience for any Apple platform.
As you design interfaces for Apple platforms, keep these principles in mind:

A conceptual graphic of two circular buttons arranged vertically on the leading side of a capsule-shape vertical item grouping. Those three elements are set atop a larger rounded square.

Hierarchy
Establish a clear visual hierarchy where controls and interface elements elevate and distinguish the content beneath them.

A conceptual graphic of a circular button on the leading side of a capsule-shape item grouping.

Harmony
Align with the concentric design of the hardware and software to create harmony between interface elements, system experiences, and devices.

A conceptual graphic of a circular button.

Consistency
Adopt platform conventions to maintain a consistent design that continuously adapts across window sizes and displays.

For developer guidance, see Adopting Liquid Glass.

Design fundamentals
A sketch of the App Store icon. The image is tinted yellow to subtly reflect the yellow in the original six-color Apple logo.
App icons
A sketch of a paint palette, suggesting the use of color. The image is tinted yellow to subtly reflect the yellow in the original six-color Apple logo.
Color
A sketch of overlapping squares, suggesting the use of transparency to hint at background content. The image is tinted yellow to subtly reflect the yellow in the original six-color Apple logo.
Materials
A sketch of a small rectangle in the upper-left quadrant of a larger rectangle, suggesting the position of a user interface element within a window. The image is overlaid with rectangular and circular grid lines and is tinted yellow to subtly reflect the yellow in the original six-color Apple logo.
Layout
A sketch of the Command key icon. The image is tinted yellow to subtly reflect the yellow in the original six-color Apple logo.
Icons
A sketch of the Accessibility icon. The image is tinted yellow to subtly reflect the yellow in the original six-color Apple logo.
Accessibility
New and updated
A sketch of two side-by-side windows in a split view arrangement, suggesting multitasking. The image is tinted orange to subtly reflect the orange in the original six-color Apple logo.
Multitasking
A stylized representation of the macOS menu bar displaying a selected menu. The image is tinted red to subtly reflect the red in the original six-color Apple logo.
The menu bar
A stylized representation of top and bottom toolbars. The image is tinted red to subtly reflect the red in the original six-color Apple logo.
Toolbars
A stylized representation of a search field containing placeholder text and a dictation icon. The image is tinted red to subtly reflect the red in the original six-color Apple logo.
Search fields
A sketch of the Game Center icon. The image is tinted blue to subtly reflect the blue in the original six-color Apple logo.
Game Center
A sketch of a pencil surrounded by sparkly stars, suggesting generative intelligence. The image is tinted blue to subtly reflect the blue in the original six-color Apple logo.
Generative AI
Topics

Getting started
Create an app or game that feels at home on every platform you support.
Learn More

Foundations
Understand how fundamental design elements help you create rich experiences.
Learn More

Patterns
Get design guidance for supporting common user actions, tasks, and experiences.
Learn More

Components
Learn how to use and customize system-defined components to give people a familiar and consistent experience.
Learn More

Inputs
Learn about the various methods people use to control your app or game and enter data.
Learn More

Technologies
Discover the Apple technologies, features, and services you can integrate into your app or game.
Learn More
Current page is Human Interface Guidelines
Apple
Developer
Documentation
Platforms
iOS
iPadOS
macOS
tvOS
visionOS
watchOS
Tools
Swift
SwiftUI
Swift Playground
TestFlight
Xcode
Xcode Cloud
SF Symbols
Topics & Technologies
Accessibility
Accessories
App Extension
App Store
Audio & Video
Augmented Reality
Design
Distribution
Education
Fonts
Games
Health & Fitness
In-App Purchase
Localization
Maps & Location
Machine Learning & AI
Open Source
Security
Safari & Web
Resources
Documentation
Tutorials
Downloads
Forums
Videos
Support
Support Articles
Contact Us
Bug Reporting
System Status
Account
Apple Developer
App Store Connect
Certificates, IDs, & Profiles
Feedback Assistant
Programs
Apple Developer Program
Apple Developer Enterprise Program
App Store Small Business Program
MFi Program
News Partner Program
Video Partner Program
Security Bounty Program
Security Research Device Program
Events
Meet with Apple
Apple Developer Centers
App Store Awards
Apple Design Awards
Apple Developer Academies
WWDC
To submit feedback on documentation, visit Feedback Assistant.
Select a color scheme preference
Light
Dark
Auto

English
Copyright © 2026 Apple Inc. All rights reserved.Terms of UsePrivacy PolicyAgreements and Guidelines