

=== [PAGE 1] ===

\

STAI.[D
CE
THEGAYMEPLAYS

BY MO GAFFNEY, JORDAN HARRISON,
UOISBS KAUFMAN, NEIL LABUTE,
WENDY MIcLEOO, ]OSE RfVERA,
PAUL RUDNICK, DOUG $TRIGHT

CONCETVED BY BRIAN SHNIPPER

*

*
DRAMATISTS
PLAY SE,RVICE
INC.

=)
I



=== [PAGE 2] ===

**

DRAMATISTS PLAY SERVICE, INC.

ESTABLISHED  BY MEMBERS  OF THE

DRAMAIISTS GUILD
OF THE AUTHORS  LEAGUE  OF AMERICA

for the

HANDLING  OF THE ACTING zuGHTS OF MEMBERS' PIAYS

and

THE ENCOURAGEMENT OF THE AMERICAN  THEAIRE

440 Park Avenue South, Nry York, NY 10016
www.dramatists.com



=== [PAGE 3] ===

STANDING ON
CEREMOI\IT
THE GAY MARRIAGE PI-AYS

BY MO GAFENEY, JORDAN  HARRTSON,
TT,TOISES  KAUFMAN,  NEIL LABUTE,
VENDY MAcLEOD, JOSE RTVERA,
PAUL RUDNICK, DOUG WRIGHT

CONCETVED  BY BRJAN SHNIPPER

*

*

DRAMATISTS
PLAY SERVICE
INC.



=== [PAGE 4] ===

THE REVISION
Copyright  @ 2013, Jordan  Harrison

THIS FLIGHTTONIGHT
Copyright  @ 2013,  Vendy Mackod

THE GAYAGENDA
Copyright  O 2013, Paul Rudnick

ON FACEBOOK
Copyright  O 2013, Doug Wright

STRANGE FRUIT
Copyright  @ 2013,  Neil LaBute

ATRADITIONAI WEDDING
Copyright  @ 2013, Mo Gaffney

MY HUSBAND
Copyright  @ 2013, Paul Rudnick

LONDON  MOSQUTTOES
Copyright  A 2U\ Moisis Kaufman

PABLO & ANDR,E\T  AT THE ALTAR  OF \TORDS
Copyright  @ 2013,  Josd Rivera

All fughts Reserved

CAUTION: Professionals  and amateurs are hereby warned  thar performance  of any or all of
the Plays in the volume STANDING  ON CEREMONY  is subjecr ro paymenr  of a royalry.
The Plays are fully protected  under the copyright  laws of the United  States ofAmerica,  and
ofall countrjes  covered by the International  Copyright Union (including  the Dominion of
Canada and the resr ofthe Bntish Commonwealth),  and ofall countries  covered by rhe Pan-
American  Copyright Convention,  the Universal Copyrighr Convention,  the Berne
Convention,  and of all countries  with which  the United  States has reciprocal  copyright rela-
tions. All rights, including  without limitation professional/amateur  stage righc, motion  pic-
ture, recitation,  lecturing,  public reading, radio broadmting,  television. video or sound
recording, all other forms of mechanical,  elecrronic  and digital reproduction,  transmission
and distribution, such as CD, DVD, the Internet, private  and file-sharing nerworks,  infor-
mation storage and retrieval  systems, phorocopying, and the righr of translation into for-
eign languages  are strictly reserued. Parricular  emphasis  is placed  upon the matter oF read-
ings, permission  for which  must be secured from  the Authors' agent in writing.

The English language stock  and amateur  stage performance  rights in the United  States, its
territories,  possessions  and Canada  for the Plays in the volume STANDING  ON CERE-
MONY  are conrolled  exclusively  bv DRAMATISTS  PIAY SERVICE,  INC., 44O Park
Avenue  South, NewYork, NY 10016. No professional  or nonprofessional  performance of
any or all of the Plays  may be given without obtaining  in advance rhe written permission  of
DRAMAIISTS  PLAY SERVICE, INC.,  and paying  the requisite  fee.

Inquiries  concerning all other rights should be addressed  to the Author(s)  c/o Dramatists
Play Service, lnc., 440 Park  Avenue  South, New York, NY 10016.

SPECIAL  NOTE
Anyone receiving  permission  to produce  any or all of the Plays in the volume STANDING
ON CEREMONY is required  ro give credit to the Authors and Conciever  m sole and exclu-
sive Authors and Conciever of the Play(s) on the ritle page of all programs  distribured  in
connection wirh performances  ofthe Play(s) and in all instances in which  the ritle(s)  ofthe
Play(s) appeus for purposes of advertising, publicizing  or otheruise  exploiring  the Play(s)

2



=== [PAGE 5] ===

and/or  a producrion  thereof.  The names of the Authors  must appear on separate  lines, in
which  no other name appears, immediately beneath the title(s) and in size of rype equal to
50olo ofthe size ofthe largest, most prominenr  letter used  for the tide(s) ofthe Play(s). No
person, firm or entiry  may receive credit larger or more prominent  than that accorded  the
Authors. The name of the Conciever  must appear  on a separate line, in which no otier name
appears,  immediately beneath the names of the Authors and in size of rype equal rc 35o/o of
thi size ofrhe  largesr, most prominent  letter used for the title(s) ofthe Play(s). The billing
musr appear as follows:

STANDING  ON CEREMONY  THE GAY MARRIAGE PI-AYS
by Mo Gaffney, Jordan  Harrison, Moisis  Kaufman,
Neil LaBute,  \i7'endy Macleod, JosC fuvera,
Paul Rudnick,  Doug Wright

Conceived  by Brian Shnipper

The following  acknowledgment  must  appear on the title page in all programs  distributed  in
connection with performances  of the Play(s), in size of rype eqtal to 25o/o  of the size of the
largesr, most prominent  letter used  for the title(s) ofthe Play(s):

STANDING  ON CERIMONY  was originaily  produced Off-Broadway  by
Annette Niemrzow r*,""lilJail1:", Yl?i$ !ffi:lr  Jon Murray/Harvey  Reese
in msociation  with
Diana Buckhantz  Niclas Nagler

3



=== [PAGE 6] ===

STANDING ON CEREMONY  was first presented byJoan Stein,
Richard Frankel,  Annette Niemtzow,  Fakston Productions, Harley
Medcalf and Jon Murray/Harvey Reese, in association with Diana
Buckhantz  and Niclas Nagler at the Minetta Lane Theater (Joe
'Watson, Executive  Producer; Luigi Caiola, Rebecca Falcon and
M"ty C. Solomon,  Associate  Producers) in New York Ciry, opening
on November 13,2011. It was directed by Stuart Ross; the set
design was by Sarah Zeitler; the lighting design was by Josh Starr;
the sound design was by Sound Associates;  the costume design
was by Frank Torre; the production  supervisor was David Gallo
Design Ltd.; the general manager  was Frankel  Green Theatrical
Management{oe'Watson;  the production manager was Production
Corefames E. Cleveland; and the production stage manager was
Seth Sklar-Hey.  The cast included  Craig Bierko, Mark Consuelos,
Polly Draper, Harriet Harris, Beth Leavel, and fuchard Thomas.

4



=== [PAGE 7] ===

CONTENTS

THE REVISION byJordan Harrison

THIS FLIGHT TONIGHT by \7endy lvlacleod

..7
.t3

79

THE GAY AGENDA by Paul Rudnick

25

ON FACEBOOK  by Doug \Tright . . . . .

STRANGE FRUIT by Neil LaBute

35

43

A TRADITIONAL \flEDDING by Mo Gaffney

49

MY HUSBAND  by Paul Rudnick. . . . .

57

65

LONDON  MOSQUITOES by Moisds Kaufman
PABLO & ANDRE\T AI THE ALTAR
OF \7ORDS by Josd Rivera



=== [PAGE 8] ===



=== [PAGE 9] ===

THE REVISION

BYJORDAN HARRISON



=== [PAGE 10] ===



=== [PAGE 11] ===

THE REVISION

The suggestion  of a huish hotel room.

rVallace sits on the bed surrounded  by torn and crumpled
pages, false starts. Nate stands. Two tuxedos hang on the
door.

youre welcome to write it.

NATE. You're still working on that?
\7ALIACE. 'Well, 
NAIE. I cant.
\7ALIACE. You can't?
NAIE. You write, I dont write. lVriters always forget, most peo-
ple dont write. A laundry list here, an email there. Thatt like me
asking you how many degrees are in an isosceles  triangle.
\TALIACE.  I8O.
NAIE. Just read me what you have. (Wallace hfis up the page to
read, then lowers it.)
\7ALIACE. Just -  be gentle. Itt a work in progress.
NATE. I'm always gentle. (Valhce raises an eyebrow at this. He\
about to read again, then suddenly  lowers the page.)
\7ALIACE. Itt pretty traditional.
NAIE. Come on!
\7ALLACE. I started out with like a Buddhist flavoring but
then I wasn't sure about -  you know, this being a proper
Georgia wedding* -  5s thsn I went sort of Southern genteel,
you know, all magnolia  blossoms  and Ashley'S7ilkes,  but then it
was all a little ...
NAIE. (Jadgmental.) Much?
\7ALIACE. ... So I ended up going traditional. (Nate just loohs at
him. rVallace cbars his throat.) "Do you, Nate Perry" -
NAIE. "Nathan," please. God is going to be watching  this.
* No Southern accents, pleme.

9



=== [PAGE 12] ===

"

-

\7ALIACE. "Do you, (Solemn uoice.)Nathan Phillip Percy, (Bach
'Walker to be your lawfrrlly wedded huband to
n nonnal)  tale'Wallace 
have and to hold, from this day forward, for richer or for poorer, in
sickness and in health, and promise,  in the eyes of God, to cherish
him the rest of your days?" (Beat.)Ylell?
NAIE. It's, um.
\(iALIACE.  (Sudden despair.) Oh, God.
NAIE. No, baby -  baby, itt good. It's just a little traditional.
\7ALIACE. I told you! I just figured Nana Walker is going to be
there, and we opted for the formal place cards -
NATE. I don't mean "traditional" Iike buttoned-down.  I mean
traditional, like, a man and a woman.
\TALIACE. Oh.
NAIE. I mean, why do we have to have the same language, right?
Different words for different  things, right?
\7ALIACE. ("1 can't belieue Im hearing this.') C6 we could just
say what we're feeling.
NAIE. Just read it back from the beginning.  It's really close. Itt
just a couple parts ...
\7ALIACE.  "Do you, Nathan Phillip Perry, take Wallace'Walker
to be your lawfully wedded  husband - 
NATE. Okay, stop right there.
\fALLACE. \X/hat?  "Husband?"
NATE. 'Well.
\7ALIACE. You want "partner?"
NAIE. Yes, but also "lawfully wedded" -
\7ALLACE. Vhat's wrong with that -
NAIE. I don't mean to split hairs, but -
\7ALLACE. But -
NATE. But we don't want to mislead  anyone. Lett be precise: No
"marriage," no "wedding." No "wedding," no "wedded" 
\7ALLACE. 's7,hat do you want me to put?
NATE. "Lawfirlly civil-unioned."  (Beat.)
'WALIACE. \fell, it isrit exactly poeny.
NAIE. "Lawfully civil-unioned" or "domestic partnered."
\7ALIACE.  Uh-huh.
NAIE. Read back what we have so far.
\7ALIACE. " ... Thke you, Nathan Phillip Percy, to be my lawfrrlly
civil-unioned or domestic-partnered partner . . . "
NAIE. Great, keep going ...

10



=== [PAGE 13] ===

"

\7ALIACE. " ... To have and to hold from this day forward ... "
NATE. Good, this is all good.
\7ALIACE. " ... for richer or for poorer - 
NATE. Oops, right there.
\7ALLACE. Vhat?
NAIE. 'Well, if the law doesn't permit an aaud. poolingof  weakh,
no joint tax returns, no inheritance of Social Securiry  then it just
seems like for us to say "for richer or poorer" -  you see what I
mean.
\7ALIACE. Vho is going to notice exactly?
NATE. Your father's buddies from the Freemasons,  for one.
\7ALLACE.  They're not Freemasons,  they work at Goldman
Sachs.
NAIE. Same difference.
\7ALIACE. Fine. (Half-jokirug.) How about "for better or for
worse, through the rising and falling of our individualized fiscal
portfolios."
NATE. You're good. You must do this for a living.
\7ALLACE. You mean you think it's -
NAIE. Totally.'Whatt next?
\7ALIACE.  (Tentatiue now.) "In sickness and in health?"
NATE. Well, right away you can see -
\7ALIACE. I cant see.'What.
NAIE. No emergency medical decisions, no paid leave to care for
a sick partner, no Do Not Resuscitate -  so we can hardly stand up
there and say "in sickness and in health' to our hundred closest
friends, I mean we dont want to look like liars do we. Just tweak
the language a bit. "In sickness ... In sickness ... "
\7ALLACE.  (Satirbal.) "In accordance with the stipulations of
our respective health care providers?"
NATE. \W'ell, we dont have to be so clinical.
\7ALIACE. (Still satirical.) "'With best wishes for each othert
continued  existence?"
NATE. Thatt nice, that softens it. And what was that last bit?
\7ALIACE.  "And do you promise, in the eyes of God, to cherish
him the rest ofyour days?"
NAIE. Oh, that is so lovely. That is just, oh. Nana lValker is going
to be just (He mabes a uague  gesture for crying.) waterworks.  Theret
just one thing.
'S7z\LIACE. 

Jesus.

11



=== [PAGE 14] ===

NATE. If we're going to be acknowledging  a higher authoriry I
just think we could be a bit rnore thoroagh. Something like "In the
eyes of God and the ever-shifting whims of state and federal con-
stitutional law."
\7ALLACE.  (tVriting.) " ... Ever-shifting whims ... "
NATE. 'Well,lett  hear it!
\7AL[ACE. The whole thing?
NATE. The whole thing!
\7ALLACE.  "Do you, Nathan Phillip Percy, take'Wallace  \Talker
to be your lawfully civil-unioned  or domestic-partnered  partner, to
have and to hold from this day forward, through the rising and
falling of your individualized  fiscal portfolios, in accordance with
the stipulations of your respective health-care  providers, with best
wishes  for each othert continued  existence,  and do you promise,  in
the eyes of God and the ever-shifting whims of state and federal
constitutional law, to cherish him for the rest of your days?"

(Beat. Nate is uisib$ moued.)
\What?
NAIE. I do.

End of Play

t2



=== [PAGE 15] ===

THIS FLIGHTTONIGHT

BY'WENDY MacLEOD



=== [PAGE 16] ===



=== [PAGE 17] ===

THIS FLIGHTTONIGHT

Allie and Hannah, two dttractiue u)omen, sit in an airport
bar at I-4X. Their table is couered with the debris of pretzel
bags and Allie:s seueral martinil Their carry-ons are in a pile
around them. Thry hear a boarding announcement for a
flight to Des Moines and Hannah ttarts to gatber her things.

down it.

have to fly across them. I saw the Doppler.

ANNOTINCER.  American Airlines Fligfu 271 to Des Moines,
Iowa, now boarding  at Gate 19.
HANNAH. Des Moines. Thatt us.
ALLIE. I'm not finished with my drink.
HANNAH.  'Well, 
ALLIE. Are you sure itt our flight?
HANNAH. Flight 27l,lA to Des Moines ...
ALLIE. \7hy isn't it delayed?
HANNAH.  I don't know but we're boarding.
ALLIE. AII the other flights are delayed. Thiret a big snowstorm
on the Great Plains.
HANNAH.  Iowa's got nothing to do with the Great Plains.
ALLIE. 'We 
HANNAH.  You are such a weather  geek.
ALLIE. I mean, is it even safe to fly?
HANNAH. \7eve been through this ...
ALLIE. Rock stars die in planes all the time ...
HANNAH.  Youre just freaking out because the last time we flew
somewhere  ...
ALLIE. The plane was exploding!
HANNAH. There was turbulence.
ALLIE. It was scary.
HANNAH.  It lasted like three minutes ...
ALLIE. It lasted forever.
HANNAH. Okay. First of all. Our flight being on time is good news.

15



=== [PAGE 18] ===

you put in that French door ...

ALLIE. Is it?
HANNAH.  My parents are waiting for us at the airport!
ALLIE. \7hy does your father keep giving me power tools?
FIANNAH.  rVhat?
ALLIE. I dont know how to use power tools!
HANNAH. 'Well, 
ALLIE. I was there when the guy from Lowet came!
HANNAH.  Het trying.
ALLIE. (Mocking Hannah's father) "Those lesbian gals love the
power tools!"
HANNAH.  Some lesbians  do like power tools.
ALLIE. You know what lesbians love? Staying home. 'We're
homebodies.
ANNOUNCER.  Now boarding Group Three for Flight27l.
HANNAH. They just announced Group Three.
ALLIE. \(hat if your mom got one of those supermarket  cakes?
HANNAH.  She didnt.
ALLIE. And what if the organist  is some old lady with a bad perm?
HANNAH. Does it matter what she looks like?
ALLIE. I wanted to pick everphing.  In Santa Monica they sell
those lilies that totally look like vulvas. And I wanted a progressive
church. Not some Mormon  thing.
HANNAH. Lutheran.
ALLIE. The church in'West Hollywood has like an enrire gay choir.
HANNAH.  Everybody has a gay choir!
ALLIE. Itt not some Norman Rockwell thing with corkboards
and potlucks and Bible study ...
HANNAH. My familyt church happens to be on the historic
register ...
ALLIE. Itt about the vibe.
HANNAH.  Okay, no, we dont have vibe-y churches in Iowa.
ALLIE. I wanted a clambake.
HANNAH. Itt March.
ALLIE. I wanted a wedding on the beach.
HANNAH. Thatt not an option in Des Moines.
ALLIE. I wanted our friends to be at our wedding.
HANNAH. Barneyt coming.  Carriet coming.
ALLIE. I wanted all of our friends to be there.
HANNAH. If they were really our friends, theyd be coming to Iowa.
ALLIE. I don't want to be friends with people willing ro go to Iowa!

t6



=== [PAGE 19] ===

HANNAH. My family's there. Your familys coming. That's whar
matters.
ALLIE. I dont want to get married in Iowa.
HANNAH. Well, we cant get married in California! Everybody's
boarding.  W'e need to find space for the garment bags.
AILIE. Yeah, I m sure the flight to Des Moines is jammed.
HANNAH. The lounge was prerry full.
ALLIE. Vhy would straight people leave LA to go to Iowa?
HANNAH.  You know what? This is beneath you. Making fun of
Iowa is just shooting fish in a barrel.
ALLIE. Do they really shoot fish in barrels there?
HANNAH. Do you want the rest of these pretzels?
ALLIE. Maybe we should wait.
HANNAH. They're boarding.
ALLIE. No, I mean ... maybe we should wait.
HANNAH. \Vait till when?
ALLIE. Till it's legal here.
HANNAH. You know, itt a little late for this ... whatever it is ...
ALLIE. Emotion?
HANNAH. This ...
ALLIE. Hissy fit?
HANNAH. I didnt say that. I just said itt a little late for you to ...
ALLIE. I didnt know there was a deadline ...
HANNAH. lVhat is the problem?
ALLIE.  Just theret your fantasy wedding and then theret ...
HANNAH. The actual wedding.
AILIE. There's the actual wedding and then there's the actual ...
HANNAH.  Marriage?
ALLIE. No...
HANNAH. This is so like you ...
ALLIE. Is it?
HANNAH. Youve  been lovey-dovey for weela and then you won't
even hold my hand!
ALLIE. Not at security!
HANNAH.  It's not suspicious behavior!
ALLIE. That woman was looking at us!
HANNAH. \7hich woman?
ALLIE. The cute one! The woman who patted us down.
HANNAH.  Oh my God, it was the uniform ...
ALLIE. It was not ...

17



=== [PAGE 20] ===

HANNAH.  I know you have a thing for women in uniform ...
ALLIE. It wasnt the uniform! It was the goose bumps! I got goose
bumps when she touched me! It was the first time I had been
touched  by another woman in a really long time. Not that I wanted
her, not that I want anybody  else, but if I did it was always possible.
But after Saturday itt going to be monogamy, monogamy, monogamy
until the day we die! (Beat.)
HANNAH.  Do you honestly think you're the only one that finds
all this hard? Remember  the woman at the stationery  store with the
thigh-high boots? She smelled amazing and for about six minutes
she and I were meant to be. Everybody wants other people but at
a certain point you have to choose. The goose bumps go but what
you get in return is ... everything. Tiust, companionship,  reliably
good sex. Knowing each other so well. Am I the one? I dont know.
But I'm a one. And I'm a good one. And I love you more than any-
one else could ever love you. And every night I m willing to rub
your feet which, no offense, can get a little whiffy. (Beat,)
ALLIE. Really?
HANNAH.  Yes.
ALLIE. \(hy didnt you tell me?
HANNAH.  Because I love you.
AILIE. Don't stop.
HANNAH. Dont you stop.
AILIE. How could I? Look at you. You're so wise.
HANNAH. (Disappointed.)'Wise?
ALLIE. And hot. So hor.
HANNAH. I must be. That girl with the dog crate is totally
checking me out.
ANNOUNCER.  Final boarding,  for Flight 271.
ALLIE. (Swiueling  to look.) C'mon, Hawkeye. Gimme that gar-
ment bag. Let's do this thingl
HANNAH. (As they exit.) I'm taking the window seat.
ALLIE. How come?
HANNAH. Because it makes you nauseous,  remember?
ALLIE. Did you remember  your iPad?
HANNAH. Dammit.
ALLIE. (Slight beat 

confdent.) I got it.

- 

End of Play

r8



=== [PAGE 21] ===

THE GAYAGENDA

BYPAUL RUDNICK



=== [PAGE 22] ===



=== [PAGE 23] ===

THE GAYAGENDA

Lights up on Mary Abigail Carstairs-Stueetbuchle,  an ourying,
oddly innocent,  well-meaning  woman, dressed in something
?retry bfi comfortable,  with well-chosen  accessories.  She?s from
a small town in Ohio, but she enjoys public speaking.

MARY ABIGAIL. Hi! (To someone special in the audience.) Hihll,
(Tb someone eke, uery happy to see them.) HilYou're here!Thank  you!
And thank all of you, for coming. I'm Mary Abigail Carstairs-
Sweetbuckle,  and I'm a homemaker, and I serve as the Recording
Secretary  on our Board of Education here in Delky, Ohio. And I m
also a proud member of the organizations  Focus on the Family,
Family First, Save The Family, Defend the Family, Moms And
Dads Are Miracles, The Christian Family Foundation, The
Christian Family Network, The Christian Family Fortress,  The
Tiaditional Family Delta Force, The Aryan Family Freedom
Fighters, and Fuck'With The Family And You Die. But I dont hate
anyone. Itt true. And thatt what I really want all of you to know,
more than anlthing. Because I know fiat we can all be very different
in so many ways, for example, some people can be Christians and
others can be Jews and some people can even be Muslims.  And I
know that this might make me a little unpopular, but I think that
being a Muslim might even be fun! Because  someday IU like to
actually meet a Muslim, and shake his hand and say, so you're a
Muslim. So tell me: \Why? You see? All I ve ever wanted is to stay
as open-minded  and as open-hearted as possible,  and to love
everyone, black and white, Democrat and Republican,  and even
the Chinese, because their wonderful  children  made my jacket. But
there is one group which, I'll admit, I've had trouble embracing.
And I ve done my research and I ve searched my soul and I ve
prayed, and the conclusion  I ve reached, after all that hard work
and all that love is this: Gay people should not be allowed to get

2t



=== [PAGE 24] ===

married. Ever. Itt too dangerous. Now, I realize that in some parts
of the country, this may be an unpopular opinion. Like in New
York, where IVe been told that theret  a bumper sticker, which says,
"My Other Car Is A Lesbian." But first of all, I want you to know
that I do not hate gay people, I love them, and more than anything,
I love my neighbors, the most wonderful same-sex couple, Bill
Angstrom and his partner, Stuart \fleinblatt. In fact, I love that in
that one sentence, I used the words "same-sex," "partnet" and the
name of a Jew. Because I adore Bill and Stuart, but I just have to
say it, they have what I can only call a Gay Agenda. And I can
prove it. Now, when Bill and Stuart first moved in next door, I did
just what any normal human being would do, and I brought over
a pan of my fresh-baked Double Peachberry  Crumble. And the
boys could not have been nicer, and they said that it meant the
world to them, and then Bill, who's just so tall and handsome,  he
said, "\7ell, that Double Peachberry  Crumble just looks so deli-
cious," and then Stuart, who has a little paunch, he patted his belly
and said, "I cant wait to enjoy a nice piece of that crumble,
although I could afford to lose a few pounds."  And that was the
first time I heard it, this tiny, quiet but very clear voice, and it said,
'And so could you, M"ry." And I looked at the two men and I said,
"Excuse me?'i[ho said that?" And they just looked puzzled, but on
my way home I couldnt stop thinking about that voice. That gay
voice. Oh, and I know that youre wondering,  but how did I know
it was gay? \fell, it was very simple, because that voice was bitchy
and it was relentless  and it was right. And then two days later, Bill
and Stuart came over to our house, to return the Crumble pan, and
they sat in our living room and they told me how much they loved
my house and Bill said that he especially loved all of the reproduc-
tion colonial furniture and the plaid wallpaper,  and that was when
I heard it again, that voice, only now it was even more distinct and
a little louder, and it said, "This is where Betry Crocker shot her-
self." And a few seconds later, Stuart was admiring my china cabi-
net, and my collection of First Edition commemorative plates, and
the voice said, "Oh look, she has plates with pictures of all the
Republican First Ladies, although  the Barbara Bush plate is more
of a platter." And I said, "She is not!" and the voice said,'And on
the Laura Bush plate, Laura is cutting herselfl,"  And I said, "How
dare you!" And that was when I realized that Bill and Stuart were
staring at me, and I said, "But dont you hear it? That gay voice?"

22



=== [PAGE 25] ===

- 

- 

And they both said no and they were so sweet, and Bill offered  me
an Ambien and I asked, "Is that a gay drug?" And the voice said,
"No, honey, tinted moisturizer is a gay drug," and I screamed,
"Stop it!" But the next day I just felt that Id been so rude, so I
invited Bill and Stuart over for Sunday  dinner, and I introduced
them to my husband  Gary whom I worship but whot very conser-
vative, and who always says that Satan created gay people, as a
crafts project. But Gary took to Bill and Stuart right away, he said
that they were just so normd,  and soon they were all making a golf
date, and then right in my ear, I heard it, as clear as a bell, the voice
said, "Look at how hrppy Gary is. He cant wait to have a big anal
three-way  with those two hot studs." And then I said it, right out
loud, I said, "My husband does not want to have anal sex!" And
there was this awhrard  pause and finally Gary said, "'Well, maybe
after dessert," and I thought I was going mad! And then my rwo
wonderfirl children came downstairs, first there was Chip, whot
almost 16 and who gets straight As and volunteers at the nursing
home and sings in the church choir, and right behind Chip was
Sarah, whot 17 and who's a real sports nut, shet into field hockey
and volleyball and before the voice could say anything I screamed,
"Shut up! Shut upl" (She's really starting to lose it.) Gay people are
everywherel  Almost every TV show now has at least one sympa-
thetic, outrageously flamboyant gay character!  Gleet Modern
Familyt Any morning show with a weatherman! And the gays are
there's lron Man and his boyfriend, Iron Man
all over the movies 
2. And in all of those romantic comedies with Sarah Jessica Parker
and Katherine Heigl and Natalie Portman, they all have a sassy gay
best friend!They are taking jobs away from black women!And now
the gay people want to get married! The gays want werything!
Theyve taken my husband  and my children and the armed forces
Ricky Martin! I couldnt believe it! No!They cant have every-
and 
thing! They have to leave me some tiny little thing to call my own,
something thatt o$Iimits, I'm sorry but the gay people cant have
marriage or Oprah or Anderson  Cooper! I said no! (,4s Mary Abigail
stdrts to wail and sob, Stuart Weinblatt, her neighbor a kind, ordinary-
looking man enters, concerned  about Mary Abigail's condition.)
STUART. Mary, are you okay?
MARYABIGAIL.  Stuart!
STUART. (Rushing to her and huggrng her) k's okay, nobodyt
going to take anything a'way from you. I know that this is all really

23



=== [PAGE 26] ===

new, and you're sdll adjusting.  So please,  take your time, we just
want to be friends. And we dont have an agenda, and I know that
sometimes it seems that way, but not everyone is gay.
MARY ABIGAIL. Matt Damon?
STUARL  Het straight.
MARYABIGAIL.  George Clooney?
STUARL Straight.
MARYABIGAIL.  (She steels herself) That handsome,  rugged man
in the plaid flannel shirt whose picture is on the wrapper of Brawny
paper towels?
STUART.  (Afier a beat.) I'm sorry. Q4s Mary Abigail opens her
mouth to scream in agony.  Blachout.)

End of Play

24



=== [PAGE 27] ===

ON FACEBOOK

BYDOUGWRIGHT



=== [PAGE 28] ===



=== [PAGE 29] ===

ON EACEBOOK

Bob steps into the ligbt. He's an ffibb soul with apleasingface.

'W'e 

'Who 

is this Beverly chick?

she

- 

-

(Bob quichly interjecx.)

BOB. The following one-act play is not fiction. It is a dramatization
of a thread which actually  appeared  on Facebook.  The names of the
participants have been changed.  (Bob takes his place behind a music
stand.) log In. (Ding.) Status Update. Bob is depressed. Today, voters
repealed  same-sex marriage in the great state of Maine. (Ding.
Beuerly steps into the light. Shei chatty, ebullient,  and without  rlncor.
She turns to Bob.)
BEVERLY. Hey, Bob! Comment from Beverly! I wish Iowa had
have gay marriage here, and I wish theyd scrap
voted that way. 
it. Now don't hate me. I have lots of gay friends, but I just hate it
when you people use the word "marriage."  Can't you call it
something  else? You know I don't want to hurt your feelings. X's
and O's. (Ding. Shane steps into the light. He's a wildly attractiue rock
'n'roller. He whispers to Bob.)
SHANE. Psst, Bob, private message! 
(Bob whispers bach.)
BOB. \W'e had language  arts together in the sixth grade 
friended me, I didn't want to be rude 
SHANE.  \Well, hold me back! (Shane speahs in full uoice now,
responding to Beuerly's posr.) Comment from Shane.  Hey, lady, back
offl You're salting our wounds,  and with ignorance. (Beuerly turns
to address Shane.)
BEVERLY. Hi, Shane! (Do I even know you?) My g y friends,
honestly, they all know how I feel. They may not like it, but we have
to agree to disagree. It doesnt mean I love them any less. Itt not
"ignorance" so dont call it that. (Shane  addresses Beuerfit directly.)
SHANE.  Maybe we can call it 'willful prejudice"?  I just erased the
rest of what I'd written, 'cuz I know you're a friend of Bob's, and I
dont want to piss him off 

- 

27



=== [PAGE 30] ===

-

BOB. Please, be my guest -
SHANE. -  But why should your thoughts on the topic govern
my choices?
BEVERLY. Have a nice evening. I'm sure we could be friends.
Smiley face.
SHANE. PleaselThatt  so bogus. How would you feel if I said that
your love relationship deserved  less stature than my own? And then
follow that up with the disingenuous  suggestion that "we could be
friends"? Get a grip. (Bob giues Shane the "thumbs up,')
BOB. ONE PERSON  LIKES THIS! (Beuerly remarhs to Shane.)
BEVERLY.  Shane, I m afraid we dont see eye-to-eye on this. To
each his own. Thatt what makes this country great. (Shane erupts
at Beuerly.)
SHANE. How can you be so fucking cavalier?
BEVERLY. Calm down, Shane!
SHANE. But todayt vote was heartbreaking to us. \Mhy do you
have to gloat?
BEVERLY. The worldt still turning, for heavent  sake. (Ding. Beuerly
whispers.) Private message  to Fran: You have to help met (Fran steps
into the light. She is a senior citizen.)
FRAN. Bev?
BEVERLY. Bob's home page! I'm all alone with these homosexuals
-  they got pink steam coming out their ears -
FRAN. \X/hich button do I push?  Share? Do I press share?
BEVERLY. Comment!  You press "comment"!  Honesdy, p12n 
FRAN. Comment from Fran: I hesitate to weigh in because of all
the fur thatt flying ... but it strikes me that Beverly is trying her
best to stay civil and courteous,  even when she has a beef with you
people. 'i(lhy can't you do the same?
BEVERLY. More. Say more.
FRAN. As it is, you sound like a bunch of crazy, souped-up radicals.
BEVERLY. Thank you, Fran. I dont believe in calling  people  narnes
just because we disagree. My daddy would spank me. Smiley face.
SHANE. My insults may be overt, and hers may be implicit. But
they're not innocent. Or civil. (Shane makes "best ffirts" with
Beuerly.) Your "opinion' is of me. Of my husband. Of the manner
in which we live. It is insuldng,  callous, and ill-informed. It is
harmful to people I care about. Dont act so surprised when people
respond in kind. (Ding. Sheik steps forward. She is Afican-
American,  and a u,oman offierce principb.)

28



=== [PAGE 31] ===

SHEILA. Comment from Sheila: How come in threads like these,
lesbians are always under-represented?  (Ding. Oliuer  steps forward;
he is middle-aged and bespectacled with a calm demeanor.)
OLIVER. Comment from Oliver. I agree with Beverly. If mar-
riage was about dedicating  yourself to the ideal that rwo people
spiritually and personally joined together can live in richness and
harmony,  then, heck, I guess theret no reason rwo men couldnt
be married.  But thatt not the way we conservatives like to define
marriage. In our purview, "marriage" is a word that describes the
heterosexual procreative sex act made legal. Done. Bingo. It's our
turf, people, and you cant play along. Not until you start puttin'
your plumbing where it belongs!
BEVERLY.  Private  message to Fran: press like!
FRAN. Thatt another button?
BEVERLY. Just do itl (Beuerly and Fran stich their thumbs up.)
BEVERLY  and FRAN. T\rO PEOPLE LIKE THIS!
BEVERLY. Thanks, Oliver!That's well-put! Smiley  face!
SHANE. Uh, Beverly, Oliver is my husband. (He rosses to Oliuer
and the two of them exchange a long, heartfeh hiss.)He's  a little sar-
castic sometimes.
OLIVER. Unbelievable.
SHANE. \What?
OLIVER.  She sent me a Friend Request!
SHANE. Youre not gonna -
OLIVER. Oops. Too late. She just cancelled it.
SHANE. Frowny face. (Oliuer turns to Beuerly.)
OLIVER.  Look, Beverly. Until youve seen your love for someone
else debated in the public square and used as political capital ... until
you've been told that the most stabilizing,  humane aspect  of your life
is tantamount to incest or pedophilia ... until you have been refused
entry to the hospital  room where your spouse  has cancer ... until all
thatt happened to you, maybe its hard to be empatheric. (Beuerly
starts to lose her composure.)
BEVERLY. Itt what you call it, peoplel Call it "domestic partner-
ship"! Call it "civil unions"! Call it whatever you like, but do not call
it "marriage"! And for Godt sake, keep it out of the church! Amen.
(h gets uery heated between  Beuerly and Shane, ising to a feuer pitch.)
SHANE. I am dedicated  to my husband -
BEVERLY. Oh, get off your high horse!
SHANE. -  And equal protection under the law -

29



=== [PAGE 32] ===

You activists think no one's opinion matters but

- 
You started this 

-

Bob is gay and sweet, I love Bob, but you are a ueryt

- 

shouldnt have to quantify our love, to you or to

-'We 

End of conuersation 

-

- 
-  So you get to denigrate my marriage,  then just skip
This entire thread is giving me a migraine! Youve

- 
I havent even started 

-

I hope we never meet, sweetheart, because it would

-
-
'W'arning: 

-

-

-

Yeah, right 

- 

-

BEVERLY. 
/our own 
-
SHANE. 
- 
BEVERLY. 
rude man _
SHANE. 
anybody 
-
BEVERLY. 
SHANE. 
out 
-BEVERLY. 
made your point. I've made mine.
SHANE. 
- 
BEVERLY. 
- 
be OPEN \TARFARE 
SHANE. Listen up, bitch 
BOB. Post Deleted. 
Facebook does not allow users to
send threatening, sexually explicit,  or harassing  messages to others.
(A pause.)
OLIVER.  Poor Beverly. She wants to embrace conservative ideol-
ogy, but she doesn't want to take responsibility  for the emotional
havoc that it wreaks.
SHEILA.  \X/hy should  she? Nobody holds her accountable. She
can scatter these "opinions" of hers willy-nilly over Facebook, then
run back to her straight family or off to her straight job or to pray
in her straight church, or over to Applebee's to eat melted cheese
with all of her straight friends 
SHANE. Except, of course, for the few gay people she actually
knows: the "nice man" who cuts her hair, or that "hilarious" queen
at the florist.
OLIVER.  Mm, yes. Folks who populate her life much as charac-
ters like Step'n Fetchit used to populate the movies.
SHANE. She parades'em around and condescends  to them at the
same time 
BEVERLY.  Dont you dare make assumptions  about me, peoplel
You dont have any idea what I eat! \Vhat I do for a living! And it
just so happens my hairdresser Felipe is straight 
SHANE. 
BEVERLY. And I don't need a damn florist. I hate Jlouers.
OLIVER. But you're making ample assumptions 2[6u6 u5 

-

30



=== [PAGE 33] ===

go back menry thirry

.Wait 

(Oliuer rdiset one finger.) that we're morally inferior to you -
(Oliuer raises a secondfinger.) that our relationships  arent worthy of
(H, raises a third.) and that our fight to lead
social sanction,  and - 
lives of digniry and shared respect is nothing more than wild-eyed,
liberal activism.
SHANE. Oh, uh, we thought you were married? Sorry. \We thought
your hairdresser was gay? My mistake.
OLIVER. Oh, and she doesnt like flowers. \7e got that wrong, too.
SHEILA. Really?  She said she doesnt like flowers?
BEVERLY. And my gay friends love mel 'W'e 
years. Since college.
SHEILA. Howt she feel about ferns? Or ficus? She okay with ficus?
BEVERLY. My gays and I, we're all still friends, so there!
OLIVER. Show them this thread. I'll wager you ll be a tad lonelier
tomorrow.
BEVERLY. Face facts, mister! You cannot and will not legislate
biology!
SHANE. But we do all the time! Reproductive rights for women,
hunting regulations, the EPA -
SHEILA. Pack it in, boys. Cant argue with a whole bowl of stupid.
BEVERLY. Dont call me stupid, just because I'm a conservative.
Thatt my right! I dont trust Osama or his policies!The  man wasnt
even born on American soil -
SHEILA. Did she really just say "Osama"?
BEVERLY. I happen to be highly educated. I watch Fox News, but
I also read USA Today and the Christian  Science Moniror,  so I see all
points of view -
OLIVER.  Yes, well, one of the surest signs of a keen intellect is the
abiliry to listen; to change onet mind and grow -
BEVERLY. Listen? Oh, I listen. To *y neighbors. To -y congress-
man. To my priest. To the Pope! I should take your word over theirs?
A bunch of faceless people I've never met, all typing in the dark?
SHANE. Look at it this way; we want the same thing.
BEVERLY. 'We do not!
SHANE. Sure we dol Husbands.
BEVERLY. \frong again, mister! I happen  to be divorced.
OLIVER. Should we feign surprise, just to be polite?
one damn minute. Scroll back. (Sheila scrolls her
SHEILA. 
cursor back until she f.nd^s what she was lookingfor.) Beverly, did you
say you were .. . diuorced?

3t



=== [PAGE 34] ===

-They 

-

BEVERLY. Yes, I did. I most certainly did.
SHEILA. You stood up in front of God and promised to cherish
and obey your husband until death do you part? And then you
reneged? On your sacred  vow? \Well, I think your divorce should be
nullified.  You can't break a deal you made with God!All my straight
friends know I feel this way, and we still love each other dearly.
SMILEY FACE. (Oliuer,  Bob and Shane all giue Sheih the "thumbs
u?.')
OLIVER, BOB and SHANE.  Three people lihe this!
SHEILA. I dont care if your husband  beats you like a red-headed
stepchild and sleeps with crack whores: TILL DEATH DO YOU
PART I'm looking for an emoticon that says "Go fuck your bad
self" but I cant seem to find it. (Beuerly is uery chastened;  she stifus
tears,)
BEVERLY. I'm the intolerant one? Me? How dare you! You dont
know me. None of you know me. Fran! Somebody! Bob? Please?
Bob? (Bob washes  his hand"s of Beuerly step?ing  back fom her.)
OLIVER.  Beverly.  Shh. Shh. (Oliuer proceeds  girugerly, and with
care.) It is my hope that someday, a beloved niece or nephew of
yours confronts what it means to be gay in the world ... and you
discover that your hopes for their own rich future -  one imbued
with boundless  possibility -  trumps the mean-spirited  sermons
playing in your head -
BEVERLY. You wonder why you people are persecuted!  You bring
it on yourselves!
OLIVER 
will be happier. And I suspect you will be, too -
BEVERLY.  This is AMERICA! Everybody  has a right to their own
beliefs! So shut up already because in other countries they dont!
OLIVER. -  Perhaps it's gotten too heated -  perhaps we've lost
the gist -
BEVERLY. If you want everyone to think like you do, then move
to RUSSIA!  Or FIRE ISLAND! That's it, I've DE-FRIENDED
YOU ALL, PEOPLE! Even the ones I didnt know.
OLIVER. -  But if you re-read this thread later in the fresh light
6f 1qrn9119\M 
BEVERLY. I am OVER and OUT! (Beuer$ exits the stage.)
BOB. Uh ... gang? Bob here. The one who started  this mess? So
I've been asked to write a short play on the theme of gay marriage.
I thought I d .iust adapt this thread. I wont do much editing. But
to do this, I need your permission.  So ... mind if I quote you?

32



=== [PAGE 35] ===

Shane? (Shane  shrugs.)
SHANE. Sure. Cool.
BOB. Oliver?
OLIVER. Cast someone skinny.
BOB. Fran?
FRAN. Maybe. Do you have to use my real name? No. 'Wait.
Dont. If itt all the same with you.
BOB. Sheila?
SHEILA. In bold-face, baby.
BOB. And ... uh ... (Bob calk into the wings.) Beverly? (Beuerly
shouts fom ofitage.)
BEVERLY. NO. ABSOLUTELY  NOT. I \7ILL SUE YOU SO
FAST YOUR HEAD SPINS. YOU HEAR ME, BOB? DON'T
YOU DARE! (Bob casts a significant  glznce at Shane, Oliuer and
Sheik. Then he bohs out at the audience, beaming a mischieuous smih.)
BOB. Oops. My bad. (He pauses, and then.) Log out.

End of Play

t)



=== [PAGE 36] ===



=== [PAGE 37] ===

STRANGE FRUIT

BYNEIL LABUTE



=== [PAGE 38] ===



=== [PAGE 39] ===

STRANGE FRUIT

Silence. Darkness. A man, Tom, standing in a bright light.
.W'earing 
a tux. He talhs to us. Anotlter man, Jerry, in a tax

stands next to him. Smiling.

TOM. ... I love cock. I do. I m really sort of just into it, you
know? Cock. And thatt what got all this started, I mean, how I
ended up here in the first place. Because of that. The "cock" situa-
tion. (Beat.) And I had, like, no idea when I was younger, I really
didnt! None. I wasnt secretly putting on my momt dresses or
make-up at night or, or, reading the Hardy Boys and getting a
boner ... nothing like that.
JERRY. I loved the Hardy Boys, are you kidding  me? They were
'S7ith
so cute, with all their ... or maybe I'm thinking of the show. 
Parker Stevenson. Yeah, thatt it! Thatt the Hardy Boys I know
The TV ones. God, he was good-looking ... Parher ...
TOM. Funny thing is, I was totally into girls when I was younger
-  seriously, I was!
JERRY. I grew up in Oregon. Beautiful part of the country ...
TOM. So I did the whole "marriage and kids" thing when I was
nineteen... I did. Yeah! \Vhy, I don't know, because I was sup-
posed to? Maybe. It was expected of me and so that's what I did.
I did that ... made it through sixteen years. Six-teen.  (Beat.) No,
"made it through"  sounds so -  accurate. I don't wanna be like
that, dump on her or be all -  But that's what I did. I just made
it through. Barely.
JERRY. I met him when he was living in Chicago, divorced and just
starting to dip his toe into the scene  a little bit -  totally not sure about
what he wanted, how he saw his life going in the next however long
... but he did like cock. That part was a given. Oh yeah!
TOM. I already said that, didnt I? And its true -  second I had
cock, it was like a light went off in my head and all these, like, fire-

37



=== [PAGE 40] ===

'Wow. I mean, yeah ... he got really good at it. All of it.

works and stuff ... big letters up in the sky saying, "YES! '$7E'RE
HOME!" (Beat.) It was pretty awesome  ...
JERRY. He couldnt get enough and I was, you know what itt like
-W.ho am I to stop a guy
-  h.y, I've always been a very giving person! 
who wants to learn? And this dude just couldnt get enough ...
TOM. I just like the whole -  the shape of the thing and how itt
.. . the taste of it, I mean -  not taste, really, it's only skin after all,
how does that taste? But it's true, theret a certain -  anyway, I'll
shut up now! But you know what I'm saying ... that shit is good!
Cock.
JERRY. 
Sex.
TOM. And somehow we sorta just stayed together and became, I
dunno,  a couple, I guess ... I mean, pretty soon he was moved into
my place and there we were. Him and me. This ... czuple. In a rela-
tionship.
JERRY. I had always  been looking for someone. I mean, a gvy ...
Someone special, who gets me.
TOM. Anyway!  Enough about us and the whole ... trust me, it
was working and if it does, when it does -  in life, I'm saying -
you shouldnt question happiness. Not ever.
JERRY. He was just a funny guy, really. That's what I liked about
him. (Beat.) And great with his kids -  on the phone, anyway. Het
not allowed to have them out to see him; they're in Orlando so he
has to fly there if he wants to be around 'em at all, and thatt ...
(Beat.) Did I mention that het good in bed?

I found that out pretty early on. Like,

- 

- 

TOM. I  do like sexr - 
immediately.
JERRY. And that's how it went and suddenly,  you know how it is
'We're looking in the mirror one morning
... like five years go by! 
we love to shave at the same time, share the water and, and the
- 
you know, use the same little brush thingie with the soap 
and
my god, I'm looking at myself and I say to him, "Jesus Christ, look
at me. l'm thirry-nine  years old." (Beat.) He leans over -  doesn't
just sort of lowers his head toward me, this little
say a word 
peck on my cheek. Then he whispers to me, "'Wait'll next year.
Forryt a bitch ... "
TOM. He had a drop of foam on his nose, like a little puppy.
Really fucking cute, if you wanna know the truth ...
JERRY. And we just stood there, bare-chested  and with these

38



=== [PAGE 41] ===

anyway,

- 

- 

- 

- 

towels on and started kissing. It was so good. Just - 
that's when he asked me. Said, "Let's get married."
TOM. 'S7hich 
was a big deal, right? I mean, Iike I said, I d already
done it before and it was, well, whatever ... it was what it was. My
kids are terrific. (Beat.) Anlway,  weU even talked about marriage
before but living in Chicago it was always about ciuil unions and
domestic partnerships, all this shit that wants to be the same , to give
us a little hope that people are about to stop being so goddamn
idiotic about something  so basic, so simple if theyd just let it be
but it's ... anyway,  he told me that he had this dream about it.
Like, a wish.
JERRY. I just wanted it to be the same as anyone else, you know?
Except two guys on top of the cake, in tLxes 
really cute and
both of us looking... itt stupid, I know, but I had actual dreams
about it! Since I was a kid.
TOM. Ve kinda just watched  and waited, without saying too
much about it and yet nothing at all was changing so we thought
maybe we could move to another state or, or, you know 
but
years go by and finally I say it as we stand there in the bathroom
shaving. I'm the one to say it but we're both thinking it. Lett make
this thing real! Marriage.
JERRY. Boom! Next day we've got tickets, we're off to California
there's a window out there for us, I mean, we're two active,
- 
informed, vibrant people, right? 'We 
see whatt going on in the
world and it turns out theret, like, this five-month period in 2008
where that golden state near the ocean comes to its senses and says,
"Yes, itt okay to be who you are," and we run out there like every-
one else. Do this thing before anybody can say "no" to us again.
And they do, they close that thing down like a book snapping  shut,
a few months later. Bam! But we do it. lVe get married.
TOM. \7e looked amazing 
I mean yes, it was just the court-
house and all, but we did the whole deal he d been wanting. Tirxes
and, and just the sn1i1s 
we were pretty much awesome.
Standing there in the hall and ... well, people were staring. Thatt
all I m gonna  say. They were. Staring.
JERRY. Just like I d dreamed about. Seriously.
TOM. And we were just giddy the rest of the day. \7e snuck offto
San Diego to be at that hotel that was in the movie with Marilyn
Monroe and the guys dressing  up like two women ... you know the
one! Itt, ummmmm ...

39



=== [PAGE 42] ===

- 

- 

- 

'W.ith 

JERRY. I'd never been to the Hotel Del Coronado. Just gorgeous,
this big ol'place propped up on the beach there ... just very ...
TOM. I took my tux offbut I could not get my husband 
or wife
- 
or whatever the hell I was gonna call him now 
he wouldnt take
his offl Said he was gonna go downstairs  and get some cigarettes ...
JERRY. My one vice.
TOM. Hed been a smoker for years 
works orx religiously but
wouldn't think of giving up his nicotine! (Smiks.)  He was standing
there, at the door to the room, smiling at me, this big grin on his
face. Asking me if I wanted anything.  Some Twinkies or whatever.
JERRY. Somebody  loves "Hostess."
TOM. I said, "No thank you, I'm a married man now ... " and we
laughed and I blew him a kiss. Out he went.
JERRY. They didnt have any Marlboros there in the little gift shop
so I went out into the streets. Looking for a7-11.
TOM. And ... apparently... he ran into three guys who were
coming up from a swim. Just some college  kids from what the news
said ... and the police report.
JERRY. I was walking  along in my tux, carrying a bag of mangoes
the single ones with
and one of those stupid roses that you buy 
- 
they keep 'em right up there
a bit of plastic around the petals 
by the checkstand  so I got one for my fella ...
TOM. And they must've  said something because I know that ...
he could never let shit go ... you know? Euer. Some guy two feet
taller than him and ten years younger and hed go after 'em like a
little rooster if it was about us or being gay or, like, any of the stuff
he believed in. Those l<tds in Africa or, or Amnesry  International 
-
he d be up in your face and telling you that you're full of shit!
(Laughs.) That was just him. You know?
JERRY. I remember  these surfer boys passing ...
TOM. He wasnt found until the next morning.  Down by the
rocks, where the watert ...
JERRY. It's just funny ... one day I'm standing in Chicago, the
next thing you know I'm walking  down a street with palm trees on
it! I mean, p alm treest. 
a rose in my hand and a paper bag full
of strange fruit and, I dunno, this . . . Iove, I guess. Yeah, loue in my
heart for him and everybody  else. Right? Even these three guys who
are moving toward me now ...
TOM. The story made the papers and was kind of a big deal, espe-
cially after all the ... anyway. Yeah.

40



=== [PAGE 43] ===

-r

- 

JERRY. Three boys who are getting louder as they come ...
TOM. One day, a few months later, somebody  sent me a picture
of us, before all that, standing  on the courthouse  steps as we waited
and I keep it out where I can see it now; I'll give
in line to go in 
it a glance when I head offto work or out for a run, that kinda thing
itt of the nvo of us, both in our suits and smiling and from a dis-

- 
tance or, if you stand back from it just a bit, you know what?
JERRY. I couldnt  see their faces but they were laughing and
yelling and the sun was just behind them as they came closer ...
TOM. 'We're like that couple you see on top of a cake. That little
plastic couple, only itt two guys. Us. Vibrant and young and frozen
for a moment. I mean ... well, you get what I mean, right?
JERRY. They were laughing.
TOM. Us standing there and smiling, as if all was right with our
lives and not anything  could possibly go wrong. You know?
JERRY. And they were getting louder and rowdier but to me, on
this day and how I was feeling ... it sounded like little birds singing.
TOM. As if nothing in the whole wide world was able to scare us
or hurt us or frighten us ...
JERRY.  These beautiful  little birds ... singing just to me from up
in Heaven above ...
TOM. No. Not us. Not ever again ... (Suddenly  a light ouerJerry
blinks offand out. He is now lost in the darkruess.  Hands unhck. Tbm
stands alone in the fading light. Tbm *ies to smile but this too fadu
away. Silence. Darkness.)

End of Play

41



=== [PAGE 44] ===

t



=== [PAGE 45] ===

ATRADITIONAL
WEDDING

BYMO GAFFNEY



=== [PAGE 46] ===



=== [PAGE 47] ===

ATRADITIONAL
WEDDING

Liz -  Early 40s, pretty; Cate -  Late 30s -  sAme.

LIZ. She asked me. The first time, not the real time.
CATE. I did not. (Thinkl) Oh, yeah, I did! At the airport. We'd
been together about three weeks.
LlZ. Yup. That was what? Fourteen years ago?
CATE. Fourteen years, three months  and 26 days.
LlZ.  Roughly.  Anyways, she drove me to the airport. Sort of
unheard-of  unless you're serious about someone.
CATE. 'We were in the loading and unloading area and I said,
"W'ill you marry me?" and gave her a bottle of Evian.
LIZ. Thar was in the days when you could bring your own warer
on the plane. I said, "Yes, I'll marry you, just as soon as itt legal,"
thinking I was safe! I guess the "real" time was when it became
legal. I dont even think anybody asked anybody, it was just "Yes,
we're doing this," and then pow, we're planning a wedding. I just
didn't want any of the traditional  crap.
CATE. She didn't want the wedding  planner.
LIZ. It just seemed so "Kardashians"  or something. I thought
weU do it differently somehow.
CATE. Anything that even was a reeny bit conventional she hated.
LlZ. Well, come on, the father "giving away'' the bride? My father
gave me away when I was fifteen. Literally. He caught me making out
with Karen Zinzer 
-  so he threw me out of the house! Luckily my
grandmother  took me in. He thought gay was carching and I d give it
to my sister. ti7ho, it turned out, was a huge cokehead  and a slut.
CATE. She's sober now.
LlZ. But she's still a slut.
CATE. Tell them what your mom said.

45



=== [PAGE 48] ===

a flower girl doesnt make me straight!

LIZ. Oh, so, I say to my mom, "tVhat's so wrong with being a les-
bian?" and she says, "Dont you think we have enough trouble with
a drug addict!" Swear to God.
CATE. So anyway ...
LlZ. Yeah, so we ended up with a wedding planner.
CATE. Because  she (Indicating Liz.) was driving me crazy.
LIZ. I think we scared her a bit.
CATE. 'Well, YOU wanted like a clownlvampirelcar show wed-
ding. If anyone in the history of weddings  had ever done it before,
Liz said no.
LlZ. I just wanted something original, something WE created.
CATE. But let's face it, what basn't been done before? It was
hard to be original. And to be honest, I kind of liked some of
that traditional stuff.
LlZ. You are such a closet heterosexual sometimes.
CAIE. 'W'anting 
LIZ. Well ...
CAIE. Oh, she also tried to forbid me from wearing  a white dress.
FORBID me? I dont think so.
LIZ. Honey, it's just that historic"lly ...
CATE. Doesn't matter, wore a white dress.
LIZ. And you looked beautiful.
CAIE. I did. So did you.
LIZ. Thank you. (Tb audience.) I wore a black dress.
CAIE. So, once we started really planning, the price shot up.
LIZ. Fucking flowers!  Number one, what's the point? And num-
ber two, they cost, Iike, just under a million dollars. They do! And
why do people have to eat a MEAL at a wedding?  \X/hat's wrong
with finger foods? Then Cate said ...
CATE. This is not our Superbowl  parry Elizabeth, this is our wed-
ding and we most definitely  will have decent food.
LIZ. So we had salmon.
CATE. And chicken and a vegetarian dish.
LlZ. Another million dollars.
CATE. My dad paid for some of it.
LIZ. Most of it.
CAIE. \Well, all of it.
LIZ. He's a great guy. (Beat, looks at Cate.)Heyl Het my dad now!
CATE. He is. Liz has rwo dadsl
LIZ. Lett be realistic, honey, Liz has maybe one and a quarter

46



=== [PAGE 49] ===

.W'hy 

'W'e

-

my girlfriend right before I met Liz.

dads. Oh, m! paren:s couldnt come. They were going to Boca.
CATE. I'm sure they tried, honey.
LIZ. Oh, yeah, it was tough with only the four months notice and
do you stick up for them all the time? They're assholes.
all. 
CATE. Because they're my family now.
LIZ. 'Well, I can only apologize.
CATE. Stop hating them so much. Let there be the possibiliry
they can change.
LlZ. They haven't changed since 1981. \7e've got to face it, some
people won't change. There isnt always that happy and-then-
they-come-around-in-the-end  thing. If people can throw their
fifteen-year-old  children out on the street for being gay then they
will probably NOT change. I was fifteen, Cate.
CATE. I know honey, and they were so wrong. But I ve gotta
hope they MIGHT change.
LlZ. Okay, okay, they might, okay? (Liz shahes  head and mouths 'ho.')
CATE. Okay. Anyway, once my dad was on board, the planning
really got going. \We did this one thing that we borrowed from the
Quakers,  where everyone stood up during the ceremony and said
something about us. A wish for us, or, you know, a little story.
LIZ. My sister spoke. She said how happy she was for us and that
we were her example of a good relationship.
CATE. It was so sweet. I never thought of US as an example. 
just try to be nice to each other and 
LIZ. And I don't force her to watch Hoarders  and she throws away
those ...
CATE. ... Those little stickers from the fruit instead of leaving
them on the sink.
LIZ and CATE. Usually.
CATE. Then our friend Sheryl got up and did this really funny
thing shed written called "Six Degrees of Cate andLiz."
LIZ. I used to date Sheryl, and Cate briefly dated Sherylt ex,
Betsy, who happens to be my accountant and whose current girl-
friend, Amy ...
CATE.  'Was 
LlZ. And fie best friend of a woman I had lived witl, Carla, who it
turns out had a fling with Cate right after she broke up with N*.y ...
CATE. A gal I had a little thing with in college after I broke up
with this professor I was dating ...
LIZ. \flhose name happened  to be Karen Zinzer, I kid you not!

47



=== [PAGE 50] ===

CAIE. Oh God, there is so much more.
LIZ. Anyways, it was hilarious. Then her dad ...
CAIE. Then my dad,75  years old, former Marine, tears streaming
down his face, saying how privileged he was to be alive for this wed-
ding, and that the only way it could be a happier day, was if my mom
was alive too. (Chohes u? a littb.) Tears werywhere.  Even my hedge-
fund brother! It was lovely. t did miss my mom though. I wore her vEil.
LIZ. Then our friend Perry, who married us said, "You may now
kiss the broom."
CATE. Oh, right, Liz didnt want bride OR groom and we didn'r
Iike the sound of "Gride," so we picked "Broom."
LIZ. We even had two little brooms on the cake.
CATE. Everyone said it was the best reception they'd ever been to.
LlZ. And now we're legally hitched. My old ball and chain. The
Missus. The Little \7oman. My OId Lady. The Battle Axe.
CATE. Thatt enough.
LlZ. My spouse. (Beat,) It's funny, when you grow up thinking there
is no way a certain thing can ever happen for you, you belittle it, you
make fun of it, you say itt stupid because if it is meaningful,  if it does
matter, then where does that leave you? I used to say a piece of paper
couldnt possibly make a difference in how two people feel. But then
it did. It does. For me, anyway. M"yb. not for everybody.
CATE. For me too. I feel married.
LIZ. I do too, well, in New York.
CATE. I dont think I'll feel completely  100 percent married until
we're married in every state.
LIZ. Vhich at this rate won't be till when?
CATE. Like 2060.
LlZ. I think it'll be before then, right? I mean, we know thousands
of couples that have gotten married.
CAIE. Eight honey, eight so far. But we have a wedding at the end
of the month.
LlZ. There is no going back!
CAIE. That's right! One day we'll be just as bad at marriage  as the
straight folk.
LlZ. Yup, and thatt how we'll know we've achieved  equaliry. (She
turnt t0 Cate.)You may now kiss the broom.

End of Play

48



=== [PAGE 51] ===

NIY HUSBAI\D

BYPAUL RUDNICK



=== [PAGE 52] ===



=== [PAGE 53] ===

NIY HUSBAI{D

Time: 3 nu.

Place: The Upper East Sidt liuing room of Gabriellc Finklestein.

The front door o?ens and Michael  Finbbstein  runs in, fantic.

Michael  is nice-looking,  in jeans and a sports jacket. He's a
drdicated New York public school  teacher.

MICHAEL. Mom? Mom?'Where are you? Are you okay? Mom?
(Gabrielle Finklestein  enters, fom the kitchen or an interior hallway.
She loohs great;  she's an NW profesnn  a deeply louing mom and a pas-
sionate aduocate for liberal causes. At the moment, slte's moaning and
staggering, as if sbe's uer! near death. She can barely speah.)
GABzuELLE. Michael ...
MICHAEL.  y4o*1r. (Michael runs to his mother,  and helps lter into
a chair.)
GABRIELLE.  Michael ...
MICIIAEL. Mom, what is it, I ran all the way here, should I call
someone, should I call 911 ...
GABRIELLE.  Michael ...
MICHAEL. Mom, talk to me, whatt happening, is it your heart,
is it, oh my God, do you have a fever, are you nauseous, okay ...
(He holds up his hand, in front of her fac) How many fingers?
GABzuELLE. (Euen closer to death.) One ... rlvo ... three ... (She
pauses.)

MICHAEL. Oh my God -  only three?
GABRIELLE.  Four ... five ... five fingers ...
MICHAEL.  Thatt right, thank God, five fingers ...
GABRIELLE.  But I still dont see a ring ...
MICHAEL. Mom?

5r



=== [PAGE 54] ===

GABRIELLE.  Did you hear?
MICHAEL. Hear what?
GABRIELLE. (Thrilled beyond belief) This afternoon! Gay mar-
riage! It passed the state legislature! Now you can get married!
MICHAEL. Mom ...
GABRIELLE. Isnt that spectacular news? Isnt that the best?
MICFIAEL. Mom, you phoned me at work and said that you were
having a dizzy spell and that it might be a stroke. I was in a meeting,
which I left to run 38 blocks to make sure you were okay ...
GABRIELLE . l'm fabulous!
MICHAEL. But I dont even have a boyfriend!
GABRIELLE.  Is that my fault?
MICHAEL. Mom ...
GABzuELLE. God knows I ve tried. I introduced you to Carolyn
Kramert son, who was very hot ...
MICHAEL. He was 87!
GABRIELLE. And I fixed you up with my stockbroker,  Billy
Berman,  whob so cute ...
MICHAEL. Het in jail!
GABRIELLE. And I set you up with my doorman, whot six foot
four with shoulders and a jawline and biceps ...
MICHAEL. And het straight!
GABRIELLE. \fho cares -  do you know how much we tip him?
MICHAEL. Mom!
GABRIELLE. Do you know what itt like for me? Do you have
any idea? I'm a liberal Jewish Democrat, I teach Political Science at
NYU, and all of my friends, when they heard the news, about the
vote, everyone called, and they all wanted to know -  so when is
Michael getting married?
MICHAEL. \Vhy would they call? Everyone knows I'm single.
GABRIELLE. Not everyone.
MICHAEL. \X/hat did you do?
GABRIELLE.  Nothing!
MICFIAEL.  What did you tell them?
GABRIELLE. I was embarrassed, for both of us! I mean, fine,
you're gay, but itt not enough, not anymore! You know Karen
Calhoun,  who teaches English Lit? Last week her son got married
in the Grand Ballroom at the Plaza, with a 5S-piece orchestra and
37 ushers, all dressed as angels, and the rabbi was flown in from the
ceiling in a golden chariot, which burst into flames.

52



=== [PAGE 55] ===

MICHAEL. 'Who was their wedding  planner?
GABRIELLE. Julie Thymor. And you know Madeline Melman,
with the identical twin lesbian daughters? Last month in New
Hampshire,  they had a double ring ceremony,  because they met
another pair of identical twin lesbians!
MICHAEL. Another pair of identical twin lesbians?
GABRIELLE. Afican American identical  twin lesbiansl How am
i supposed to compete with that? It was so moving! You should ve
seen the wedding  cake -  it looked like an ad for The Helpt
MICHAEL. Mom!
GABRIELLE.  Every Sunday,  when I read the wedding announce-
ments in the Times, I look for your picture.
MICHAEL.  Mom, I have been trying to meet someone forever.
I've spent thousands of dollars on the gay versions of eHarmony
and J-Date and Match.com.
GABRIELLE.  Me too.
MICHAEL. You? \7hy?
GABRIELLE.  I pretended I was you. "Michael Finkelstein,  pub-
lic school teacher, loves his mom, hot, hard-bodied and hung."
MICHAEL. Did you get any responses?
GABRIELLE.  Only other moms.
MICHAEL.  Exactly! Look, someday, Iike in a million years, maybe
I'll find someone and maybe we'll get married, or maybe not. But
you have to stop pressuring  me.
GABRIELLE.  Fine. I understand.
MICHAEL.  Thank you.
GABRIELLE. I only have one minor, tiny little request.
MICHAEL. Name it.
GABRIELLE. This weekend,  please do me a favor, and dont read
the Sunday  Times.
MiCHAEL. Mom ...
GABRIELLE. At least not the wedding announcements ...
MICHAEL. Oh my God, Mom ...
GABRIELLE. Just aim right for the Book Reuiew ...
MICHAEL. I swear I will kill you. Mom, Mother, what did you do?
GABRIELLE. Nothing! Not a thing! Itt just, okay, please, I'm
begging you, please try to understand, I was in Starbucks, minding
my own business,  and Eleanor  Markowitz comes in, you know the
one, she teaches Queer Cinema.
MICHAEL. Even though  shet not gay.

53



=== [PAGE 56] ===

Michaelangelo

GABRIELLE.  Exactly.  She just does it to show off to prove rhar
shet got the gayest life ever. She calls her husband,  Sidney, she calls
him her partner. And shet always  showing me pictures of the two
of them, both dressed as sailors,  she says it's very homoerotic, in the
tradition of Jean Genet. And I told her, no, it's ridiculous, in the
tradition of Anytbing  Goes.
MICHAEL. Thatt right!
GABRIELLE.  But Tiresday was the last straw. Because she shows
me pictures of her son Oscart honeymoon.  And you know, they
named him Oscar \7ilde, just to make sure hed be gay.
MICHAEL. So his name is Oscar Wilde Markowitz?
GABRIELLE.  Oscar Wilde Valt 'Whitman 
Markowitz.
MICHAEL. Oh my God ...
GABRIELLE. And so she shows me one picture after another,
heret Oscar and his husband in front of Stonewall, heret Oscar
and his husband at the revival of The Normal Heart, heret Oscar
and his husband making one of those "It Gets Better" videos. They
were surrounded  by all of their hundreds of wedding gifts, and
Oscar looks right into the camera  and he says, "If youre being bul-
lied in middle school, dont worry, because it gets better." And the
husband says, "And you get stemware."
MICHAEL. Oh my God ...
GABzuELLE.  And the two of them, they're hyphenating their last
names ...
MICHAEL. Oh no, please no ...
GABzuELLE.  So he's gonna be Oscar \yr'ilde \Walt Vhitman
Michelangelo Markowitz-'Waldbaum!
MICHAEL. Stop!
GABRIELLE.  And they just adopted a Ukranian  baby, and do you
know what they're calling it?
MICHAEL. \)(hat?
GABRIELLE.  Christopher.
MICHAEL. \7ell, thatt not so bad ...
GABRIELLE. Christopher  Street Marcel Proust Rosie O'Donnell
Markowitz-\WaIdbaum!
MICFIAEL. That's insane!
GABRIELLE. I cracked! I couldnt help myselfl Eleanor just made
me so angry so I told her, I said, you know -  my son Michael  is

getting married too!

54



=== [PAGE 57] ===

-  how does he know the children  arc gay?

MICHAEL. You didnt!
GABRIELLE.  To a cardiac  surgeon who operates exclusively  on
gay children in third-world  countries.
MICHAEL. 'Wait 
GABRIELLE.  Because their hearts are so big.
MICHAEL. Oh my God ...
GABRIELLE. And your husband, I wanted him to be even gayer
than Eleanort son and his husband  put together,  so I told her that
his name was -  Dr. Todd \7illiams-Sonoma-Outlet.
MICHAEL. Ofcourse.
GABRIELLE.  And youre getting married  next weekend, and youte
registered  everywhere, and I sent the announcement  to the Times.
MICHAEL. I cant believe this! I cant believe that you have so lit-
tle faith in me! I cant believe that my own mother would stoop so
low!
GABRIELLE. i m sorry I was out of my mind! I'll call Eleanor, I'll
tell her it was all a lie, and then I'll call the Times and I'11 have them
cancel the announcement.
MICHAEL. 'Wait.
GABRIELLE. \7hat?
MICHAEL. Did you ... did you send in a picture? Of the hrppy
couple?
GABRIELLE. Of course. Because  when Eleanor's son got married
the two men both had matching trendy haircuts and matching
trendy eyeglass frames and they both looked so smug. So for Todd,
I found this picture of a male model and I photoshopped the two
ofyou.
MICHAEL. \fihich male model?
GABRIELLE. Het gorgeous, from the Dolce and Gabbana ads ...
MICHAEL. Oh my God, the guy with the chest and the abs and
the tiny white bathing  suit?
GABRIELLE.  Of course.
MICHAEL. In the photo, in our wedding picture,  is he -  is he
wearing the tiny white bathing  suit?
GABRIELLE. You both are.
MICFIAEL.  Really?
GABRIELLE.  For the picture of you, I used your head, but I pho-
toshopped  Supermant legs, Captain Americis arms and the Green
Lanternt  shoulders.
MICHAEL. \7hat about my waistline?

55



=== [PAGE 58] ===

*Fuck 

Ebanor Markowitz "Is that okay?

GABRIELLE.'Wonder'Woman.
MICHAEL. I love that!
GABRIELLE.  I got an advance  copy of the announcement. (She
tahes out a copy of the Trmes and reads ahud.) "Michael Finklestein
and Dr. Todd Villiams-Sonoma-Oudet  were married earlier today
onst€e  at Radio City Music Hall, during the Tony Awards, by the
Pope. His Holiness told Mr. Finklestein, "Your mother  has convinced
me that gay marriage is great." The Pope concluded the ceremony by
announcing, 
MICFIAEL.  (Sincerely.) Mom, itt beautiful.
GABRIELLE. Mazel tou! (They embrace joyously.  Blackout.)

End of Play

56



=== [PAGE 59] ===

LONDON MOSQUTTOES

BYMOISES KAUFIVIAN



=== [PAGE 60] ===



=== [PAGE 61] ===

LONDON MOSQUTTOES

Time and pkce: 2010. Here.

Joe. Dressed in mourning. Wears a yarmulhe.

JOE. (Standing at a podium next to Paul's cffin.) Before I begin,
Rabbi Tziviak has asked me to tell you that the bus to the ceme-
tery will be departing from the north gate. So we'll gather there
after this. Thank you all very much for coming. Paul would have
been very moved to see you all here. And wherever he is, he thanks
you. And I thank you. (He looks at the cffin. Pause.) "Perhaps we,
as a species,  have ceased to evolve."  (Pause. Grinning.) That was
the first thing Paul ever said to me. You cant help but be seduced
by that. (Grin.) It was right after Kennedyt assassination.  \7e were
in the common room of our college staring at the television.
Theyd just announced that Kennedy had died and people were in
shock. And he turned to me, even though we'd never met, and he
said: "Perhaps  we, as a species, have ceased to evolve." I didn't
know what to say. So I nodded. The rest of the week I kept trying
to find ways to talk to him. He was so handsome  back thenl And
so tall! A looker, really. But he was always surrounded  by girls. I
finally got the courage to walk up to him, a few weeks later, in the
cafeteria. I said: "You can't really believe that." He looked at me
baffled. "That we, as a species have ceased to evolve." He said:
"\Who are you?" "I'm the guy who was standing next to you when
they announced  that John F. Kennedy  had died. Do you really
believe that we have ceased to evolve?" 'Absolutely." "Cynicism is
a very lazy political stance." I said. "I'm studying to be an evolu-
tionary biologist. For me, it's not a political stance. Itt the begin-
ning of a hypothesis. I am talking about DNA." I wasn't prepared
for that answer. So I stood there until I felt my cheeks rurning red
and then I walked away. I avoided him for the next few weeks. I

59



=== [PAGE 62] ===

'W'e 

was too embarrassed to speak to him. Finally, he approached me
and said, 'Are we going to wait for another president to die before
we talk again?" I told him it was in very bad taste to joke about
murdered presidents.  He said he didnt know anything about
"taste." After that we started spending  time together.  I learned that
he loved Miles Davis and Jackson Pollock. That he was one of the
best students  in his class. That he liked hockey but hated all other
sports. That he only drank gin because everything else gave him a
headache.  \7e spent a lot of time talking those days: politics, liter-
arure, late into the night! Typically we would go on dates with
girls, double dates, that sort of thing. Wed take the girls to a
movie or a diner. Then wed drop them off and go to his dorm and
talk. The talks got longer and longer. And, well ... you can imag-
messed around but
ine the rest. \tre started messing around. 
we'd never talk about it. Neither of us knew what to call it, what
we were doing. So this became our routine:  tWe would go out with
girls, we'd drop them off, go back to our dorms and mess around
with each other. And then, after about a year of this, an entire
year, one night we went out with these rwo girls. Sweet girls. But
we only had eyes for each other. After a while the girls got upset
with us and said: "You guys are more interested in talking to each
other than in talking to us." And they left. So we went back to our
dorm and kept talking until three in the morning. 'When 
Paul
finally got up to leave, he stood facing the door for a few
moments,  as if frozen. Then without a word he turned around,
walked back over to me and kissed me. (Pause. Surprise.) That was
the first time hed kissed me. (Pause.) All that year we'd been mess-
ing around, we'd never kissedl I guess that helped us pretend it
wasn't happening. But after he kissed me, it was impossible to pre-
tend any longer. \When he left, I couldnt sleep that night. So the
next day I blurted it out, I said, "You kissed me last night." He
said: "Yeah, I did." "\7hat does that mean?" He said: "You know
what it means as well as I do! 'We should stop dating womenl"
(Pause.) That was Paul, he didnt have much patience for anything
but the truth. And then we were together for forty-six  years. Until
last Thursday. People  ask us how we did it. How we lasted togeth-
er that long. It's easy. You just have to have a large apartment.
(Pause.) And know when to leave the roomt (Pause.)'We  got a rent-
controlled apartment in the village. \7e could make our rent in a
week and the rest of the time was ours. 'We called it "a rental of

60



=== [PAGE 63] ===

onet own." This was before many of you knew him. He went to
work for a laboratory and I started teaching history in a Bronx
high school. (Pause.) \7hen Nixon bombed  Cambodia,  we heard
of the thousands of civilians that were being murdered,  and he
once again said to me: "'S7'e as a species have ceased to evolve." I
said: "Paul, prove it or stop saying that." He said: "London
Mosquitoes."  I had no idea what he was talking about. He
explained to me that when the London Underground was being
built in the I850s, some mosquitoes  got caught in the tunnels that
were excavated. And over the next 150 years these mosquitoes
different from the above-ground
evolved into a new species - 
mosquitoes.  New species usually  take thousands  of years to evolve.
But these London mosquitoes did it in less than 150 years. He
said to me, "Read any account of human history. 'Weve 
been
behaving the same exact way for thousands of years: killing,
destroying everything in sight." I told him that was not proof that
we had ceased to evolve. "Nixon! Nixon is the proof we've stopped
evolving. These mosquitoes learned that in order to survive they
had to alter themselves. How many more people are going to have
to die before we learn from mosquitoes?"  (Long pause. Smile.) Paul
'We fought a lot in the early years. But time
was so headstrong! 
changed us. 'We got used to each other. And in time we fought
Iess. It became easier... and lovelier. (Pause.) And then there was
The Plague. And many, many more people did die. We lost every
single one of our friends. Not some of them. All of our friends
died. How we survived is a mystery to me. And I began to think
that maybe Paul was right. So many of us were dying and the
world was doing nothing. And Paul's hypothesis  seemed true. And
although  we were not the type of people to protest in the streets,
we got organized  and we took to the streets. At that time, Paul was
employed in a laboratory  in Poughkeepsie. And he marched  to his
boss and said, "I d like you to know that I'm a homosexual and I
dont want to lie about it anymore. If you think that'll be a prob-
Iem, I'll hand in my resignation. If not, I'll stay."'Well, of course he
was the brightest scientist in the lab so they couldn't let him go. I
said, "Paul, your boss is changing. He's evolving."  (Mischieuous
smile.) "That doesn't count. He had no choice," he replied. "But
Paul, isn't that what evolution is?" "One example does not make a
species,"  he said, and left the room.  (Pause, smiling.) After 46 years,
how do I tellyou about Paul? About all that I witnessed in him? He

6t



=== [PAGE 64] ===

'We 

hated people who were annoying. He didnt really know how to be
polite. And he didn't try. But he was loyal and he was honest. He
would never lie to protect your feelings. And he didnt snore too
much. (Smih.) That was good. (Pause.) 'We 
were near the towers
were at the DMV down there. The
when they were attacked. 
first plane hit and we came out to see what had happened.'We  saw
the second plane hit. There were several dozen people there.
Watching the buildings burn. And the worst part was the people
jumping out of windows ... Every time someone would jump, the
crowd around us would scream. And look away. Not Paul! Paul
kept looking at the people as they fell. He didn't scream. He just
watched. I told him, Paul, you don't need to watch that. You
should look away. And he said, (Slow and deliberarr.)  "NO. I need
to see them. They shouldn't die alone. Someone must witness
them. I must witness them." (He tries t0 not get emotional.) Paul
was not the rype of man that books are written about. He was not
a hero. \X/hich is why it's so important  that you are all here today.
tWhen this whole "marriage conversation" started and our friends
began getting married, I asked him about it: Should we get mar-
ried? He didnt reply, he just turned and walked out of the room.
Every time I tried to bring it up, hed get upset and storm out.
Finally, I told him: I don't care much one way or another,  but why
don't you want to get married? Paul yelled at me and said, "If we
married now, we'd be having our one-year  anniversary next year.
'What 
would that say about the last forry-five years? That we were
just messing around?  Messing around for all that time?" He said,
"I stopped messing around with you the night I kissed youl NOI
'We can't erase history that way!" He was right, of course. My Paul.
Marriage  is about history. And it's about witnessingl I have been
so fortunate in my life to be able to witness Paul for so longl
(Pause.) \7e're always gaining things. Small and large victories. But
each triumph has a price. 'We get AIDS medications, but our
fighting spirit ceases to soar.'We get to come out of the closet, but
we lose the delicious clandestine habits of the past, we get "mar-
riage" but we lose the rigor of inventing  our own unions. And now
we lose Paul. And with Paul we lose a generation  of men and
women who persisted.  \X/ho were not heroes. \flho lived in the
world that was given to them! Before long, we will all be gone. As
you know, in the end, Paul got cancer. Pancreatic.  He diagnosed
himself  before he even went to the doctor. That was good. It gave

62



=== [PAGE 65] ===

us a little more time. Time to tie things up. \7hen he was at the
hospital, close to the end, one night he started laughing. I thought
it was the morphine. "Do you need anything?" I said. "The
London  mosquitoes,"  he said laughing. (Joe smiles.) I said, "Yes,
Paul. The London mosquitoes  are smarter than us." "No," he said,
"You dont understand."  "'W'hat is it, Paul?" "Their DNA changed.
They are a new species! They cant mate with the above ground
mosquitoes anymore! Don't you see? Itt called reproducdve isola-
tion." "No. I dont understand."  "Their genetic code is different.
So they cant mate with the previous speciesl Itt proof that they
have evolved. They can't mate with the earlier species!!! Just like
us. You and I can no longer mate with the rest of the world. You
and I have evolvedl 'We are the London mosquitoes. Dont you see?
\7e are the proof that our race is evolving."  "Yes, Paul," I said. And
then he laughed more. (Pause. He looks at the cffin.) Heret to you,
my beloved Paul. Death has not parted us. I am with you. (Tb us.)
Here lies Paul Foster. And I remain. I remain to tell you what I've
witnessed ... \7hile I'm around. (He begins to ?rqt as the lights
begin to fade to blach.) Yitgadal  uyitkadash shmei raba. Be'alma
diura kheroosay ...

End of Play

53



=== [PAGE 66] ===



=== [PAGE 67] ===

PABLO sc A[{DREI[ AI
THEAIJTAR OFWORDS

nvJOSE Rr\{ERA



=== [PAGE 68] ===



=== [PAGE 69] ===

PABLO 8c ANDRE\U7 AI
THEAI;IAR OF\UTORDS

A wedding  chapel. Two men, Pablo and Andreru,  face each
other. A priest stands upttage of them. Pablo turns to the
au d i e n c e / c o ngregat i o n.

- 

PABLO. So, we wrote our own vows and stuff.
ANDRE\?: They say a lot about the kind of love we want to
express to each other.
PABLO. They say the things we never really say in this hugely
titanic struggle it can sometimes  be just to survive, day to day.
ANDRE\( .We 
went through how many drafts?
PABLO. Because we wanted to capture something  that cant be
caught.
ANDRE\( To swear in front of these friends here today and our
yes, I mean you, Aunt
somewhat bewildered family members 
and to swear, also, before whatever great, loving, immense,
Rosa - 
fearless, lifeJoving force put this beautiful man on the beautiful
Earth for me to admire and devour ...
PABLO. God is great. God is good. Viua Dios!
ANDRE\7. To swear to listen. To swear to protect. To swear to
applaud. To swear to cultivate the right kinds of silence.
PABLO. To swear to criticize in the most constructive manner.
ANDRE\7.  To swear patience despite the ever-accelerating  kick-
ass of time.
PABLO. To swear peace even when, inside our minds, a war may
rage, a storm may destroy the simple order of our thoughts and
our souls.
ANDRE\7. To swear to never skip a day, phone it in, or coast
easily through the few God-given hours we were blessed to take
home.

67



=== [PAGE 70] ===

PABLO. To swear an honest love, unblemished with lies, words
that carry the simple  codes of desire and want, openly, unashamed,
unafraid.
ANDRE\( To swear to be a guardian of your health.
PABLO. To swear to be the armed guard of your trust, your
secrets, your private joys.
ANDRE\( To swear to be the landlord of the hidden places where
you are most vulnerable, the dark corners where you go to cry ...
I promise to wait there with strength and ample shoulders  ... and
other bodily comforts should the need arise.
PABLO.  (Tb congregation.)  He improvised that last partl (Laughs.)
To cage your dragons and teach them to behave.
ANDRE\( To dream your dreams for you when they're too big
for you to carry and kill the dark angels of your doubts and smooth
the road ahead so you may walk into your sunshine and claim
whatt rightfully yours.
PABLO. To teach you to salsa dance.
ANDRE\f.  To teach you to appreciate haggis.
PABLO. Ay, Dios, this is going to be harder than I ever imagined!
ANDRE\7. If marriage is about love, why would we want to
reduce the amount  of love in the world?
PABLO. I look at you and want to love you more.
ANDRE\( I say good morning and he hears a Neruda love son-
net. I wake up looking like a creature from a Guillermo del Toro
movie and this bright man, with angel's eyes, sees somehow  some-
thing that moves him to smile and not run away screaming to the
nearest former boyfriend.
PABLO. Dont worqy, dear, theyve all been banished  to a galaxy
far, far away.
ANDRE\7. Then why are half of them in this church?
PABLO. Back up! (Andretu reacltes into his pochet,  tahes out a ring.)
ANDRE\fl  I have a ring in my hand, queridn.It's made of the min-
erals of my absolute affection  for you. It's inscribed with the tears of
joy you make me cry when you dont even suspect youre doing a
thing to me. It's worth more to me than all the world's supposed
treasures  because this simple circle fits around the infinite space that
is the length and breadth of my adoration. (Andrew slips the ring on
Pablo:s fnger. Pablo  reaches into a pochet and pulk out a ring.)
PABLO. 'S7ith this ring, precioso,I  thee wed. I thee take. I thee
embrace. I thee celebrate. I thee wash from head to toe. I thee

6B



=== [PAGE 71] ===

articulate. I thee hold, through doubts and fevers and loss and the
sweet, melancholy  and eventual crumbling  of our well-worn  bodies.
(Pablo puts the ring on Andrew's finger They bold hands.)
ANDRE\(/. And I will lie with you...
PABLO. ... In a bed of flames ...
ANDRE\?: ... In a bed of soft, lingering  hope ...
PABLO. ... In a bed of moonlight  ...
ANDRE\( ... In a bed of ice cream and cake ...
PABLO. . .. In a bed of spinning  asteroids ...
ANDRE\( ... In a bed of circus clowns ...
PABLO. ... In a bed of exclamation points!
ANDRE\7. And finally ...
PABLO. ... In the quiet, earthy, wormy, deep, silent, cozy, encom-
passing, ravaging, and utterly nasry little bed ofour final rest.
ANDRE\7. (To the congregatioru.) He improvised  that last part.
(Lighx out.)

End of Play

69



=== [PAGE 72] ===

NE$TPLAYS
*  ACT ONE byJames  Lapine. Growing up in an impoverished  Bronx family
and forced to drop out of school at age thirteen, Moss Hart dreamed of joining
the glamorous world of the theater.  Hartt famous memoir ,4ct One plots his
unlikely collaboration with the legendary playwright George S. Kaufman and his
arrival  on Broadway. Tony Award-winning  writer and director James Lapine  has
adapted Act One for the stage, creating a firnny, heartbreaking  and suspenseful
celebration of a playwright and his work. ". . .brims contagiously with the ineffable,
irrational and irre[utable  passion  for that endangered  religion called the Theater."
-NY Times. "...wrought with abundant skill and empathy."  -Time Out. [8M,
4\Vl ISBN: 97 8-0-8222-3217  -9

*  THE VEIL by Conor McPherson.  May 1822, rural Ireland. The defrocked
Reverend  Berkeley arrives  at the crumbling former glory of Mount Prospect
House to accompany a young woman to England.  Seventeen-year-old Hannah is
to be married offto a marquis in order to resolve the debts of her mother's estate.
However, compelled by the strange voices that haunt his beautiful young charge and
a fascination with the psychic  current that pervades the house, Berkeley  proposes a
s6ance, the consequences  ofwhich  are catastrophic.  "...an effective  mixture of
dark comedy  and suspense."  -Telegraph (London). 'A cracking fireside tale of
haunting and decay." -Times (London). t3M, 5\fl ISBN: 978-0-8222-3313-8

* AN OCTOROON  by BrandenJacobs-Jenkins.  Winner of the 2014 OBIE
Award for Best New American Play. Judge Pey'ton is dead and his plantation
Terrebonne is in financial  ruins.  Peyton's handsome nephew George  arrives  as heir
apparent  and quickly falls in love with Zoe, a beautiful octoroon.  But the evil
overseer M'Closky  has other plans-for  both Terrebonne  andZoe.In 1859, a fa-
mous Irishman wrote this play about  slavery in America. Now an American  tries
to write his own. 'AN OCTOROON  invites us to laugh loudll, and easily at how
naive  rhe old stereorypes now seem, until nothing seems fi.rnny  at all." -NYTimes
[1 0M, 5\V] ISBN: 978-0-8222-3226-r

*  wANOV translated and adapted by Curt Columbus. In this lascinating
early work by Anton Chekhou *e see the union of humor and pathos that would
become his trademark.  A restless man, Nicholai Ivanov struggles to dig himself
out oFdebt and out ofprovincial boredom. til/hen the local doctor,  Lvov, informs
Ivanov  that his wile Anna is dying and accuses  him of worser,ing  her condition
with his foul moods, Ivanov is sent into a downward  spiral of depression  and en-
nui. He soon finds himself drawn to a beautiful  young woman,  Sasha, full of hope
and energy. Finding himself stuck between a romantic  young  misrress  and his
ailing wife, Ivanov falls deeper into crisis, heading toward inevitable  tragedy.  [8M,
8\71 ISBN:  97 8-0-8222-3155  -4

DRAMATISTS  PLAY SERVICE,  INC.
440 ParkAvenue  South, NewYork, NY f 00f 6 212-683-8960 Eu2l2-213-1539
postmaster@&amatists.com  www.dramatists.com



=== [PAGE 73] ===

NE$TPLAYS
* I'LL EATYOU LAST: A CI{ATWITH SUE MENGERS  byJohn  Logan. For
more than 20 years,  Sue Mengers'clients  were the biggest  names in show business:
Barbra Streisand,  Faye Dunaway,  Burt Reynolds, Ali MacGraw,  Gene Hackman,
Cher, Candice Bergen,  Ryan O'Neal, Nick Nolte, Mike Nichols, Gore Vidal, Bob
Fosse...If  her clients were the talk of the rown, she was the town, and her dinner
parties  were the enry of Hollywood. Now, you're invited inro her glamorous
Beverly Hills home for an evening of dlsh, dirry secrets  and all rhe inside showbiz
details only Sue can tell you. 'A delectable  soufld  of a solo show...thanks to the
buoyant, witry writing of Mr. Logan" *NY Times. "80 irresistible minutes of
primo tinseltown dish from a certified master  chef." -Hollywood  Reporter. [1V]
ISBN: 978-0-8222-307  9 -3

*  PUNK ROCK by Simon Stephens.  In a private school outside of Manchester,
England, a group ofhighly-articulate sevenreen-year-olds flirt and posture  their way
through the day while preparing  for their A-trvel mock exams. rVith hormones
raging and minimal adult supervision, the students musr prepare  for their future
and survive  the savagery  ofhigh school.  Inspired by playwright  Simon Stephens'
- 
own experiences as a teachet PUNK ROCK  is an honest  and unnerving  chronicle
of contemporary adolescence.  "[A] tender, ferocious and frightning  play." -NY
Times. "[A] muscular  little play that starts out funny and lerocious then reveals
its compassion by degrees." -Holllnvood  Reporter. [5M, 3\7] ISBN: 978-0-
8222-3288-9

*  THE COUNTRY HOUSE by Donald Margulies. A brood of famous  and
longing-to-be-famous  creative  artists have gathered at their summer home during
the'W'illiamstown Theatre Festival.  \7hen the weekend takes an unexpected turn,
everyone  is lorced to improvise, inciting  a series of simmering  )ealousies, romantic
ourbursrs, and passionate  soul-searching.  Both witry and compelling,  THE
COUNTRY  HOUSE provides a piercing  look at a family o[ performers  coming
ro terms with the roles they play in each othert lives. 'A valentine  to the artists ol
the stage." -NY Times.  "Remarkably candid and funny."  -Variery. t3M, 3\7]
ISBN: 978-0-8 222-327  4-2

*  OUR I-ADY  OF KIBEHO  by Katori Hall. Based on real events, OUR LADY
OF KIBEHO is an exploration  of fairh, doubt, and the power and consequences of
both. In 1981,  a village girl in Rwanda  claims  to see the Virgin Mary. Ostracized  by
her schoolmates  and labeled disturbed,  everyone  refuses to believe, until impossible
happenings  appear again and again. Skepticism gives way to fear, and then to belief,
causing  upheaval in the school community and beyond. "Tiansfixing."  -NYTimes.
"Hall's  passionate play renews belief in what theater  can do." -Time Out [7M, 8\7;
I boyJ ISBN: 97 8-0-8222-3301 -5

DRAMATISTS  PI-{Y  SERVICE,  INC.
440 ParkAvenue  South, NwYork, NY 100f 6 2n'683'896O Fx2l2-213'1539
postmastergdramatists.com www.dmmatists.com



=== [PAGE 74] ===

NE$TPIAYS
* AGES OF THE MOON by Sam Shepard. Byron and Ames are old friends,
reunited  by mutual desperation. Over bourbon on ice, they sit, refect and bicker
until 6fry years oFlove, friendship and rivalry are put to the test at the barrel ofa
gun. 'A poignant  and honest continuation ofthemes  that have always been present
in the work o[one of this countryt most important dramatists, here reconsidered
in the light and shadow of time passed." -NY Times.  "Finely  wrought.  . .as enjoy-
able and enlightening  as a night spent stargazing."  -Thlkin Broadway. [2M] ISBN:
978-0-8222-2462-4

* ALL THE r$(/AY  by Robert Schenkkan.  \Winner of the 20 I 4 Tony Award for
Best Play. November,  1963. An assassin's  bullet catapults Lyndon Baines Johnson
into the presidency. A Shakespearean 6gure ofrowering ambition and appetite, this
charismatic,  conficted Texan hurls himself into the passage of the Civil fughts
Act-a tinderbox issue emblematic  of a divided America-even as he campaigns
lor re-election in his own right, and the recognition he so desperately  wants.  In
Pulirzer Prize and Tony Award-winning  Robert Schenkkan's vivid dramatization  of
LBJ s first year in office,  means versus ends plays out on the precipice of modern
America.  ALL THE \fAY is a searing, enthralling exploration of the morality o[
power. It's not persona.l, it's just politics. ". . .action-packed,  thoroughly gripping.  ..
jaw-dropping political drama." -Variety. 'A theatrical coup...nonstop  action. The
suspense  of a first-class  thriller." -NYl. [17M, 3V/] ISBN: 978-0-8222-3181-3

* CHOIR  BOY by Tarell Alvin McCraney.  The Charles  R. Drew Prep School  for
Boys is dedicated  to the creation ofstrong, ethical  black men. Pharus wants  nothing
more than to take his rightful place as leader of the school's legendary  gospel choir.
Can he find his way inside the hallowed halls ofthis institution if he sings  in his own
key? "[An] affecting and honest portrait...ofa  gay youth rentatively  beginning  ro
find the courage to let the truth about himself become known."  -NYTimes. "ln his
stirring and srylishly told drama, Tarell Alvin McCraney  cannily  explores race and
sexudiry and the graces and graviry of history." -NY Daily News. [7M] ISBN: 978-
0-8222-3116-5

* THE ELECTRIC BABY by Stefanie T.adrtvec.  When Helen  causes a car
accident  that kills a young man, a group o[fractured souls cross paths and connect
around  a mysterious dying baby who glows like the moon. Folk tales and folklore
weave throughout  this magical story of sad endings, strange beginnings  and the
unlikely people  that get you from one place to rhe next. "The imperceprible magic
that pervades  human existence and the power ofmyth to assuage  sorrow  are invoked
by the playwright  as she enwvines the lives of strangers in THE ELECTRIC  BABX a
touching  drama."  -NYTimes. "As dazzling  as the dialogue  is dreamfirl." -Piasburgh
Ciry Paper. t3M, 3\rl ISBN: 978-0-8222-301r-3

DRAMAIISTS  PI-AY SERVICE,  INC.
440 ParkAvenue  South, NewYork lrIY f OOf 6 212-683-89@  Far 212-2t3-t539
postmaster4Tdramatists.com  www.dmmatists.com



=== [PAGE 75] ===

The destination  for the
fnest plays in the English language:

www.dramatists.com

*
Browse

plays by title, author,  cast size
or keyword  with The PlayFinderru
*
Order
acting editions, librettos, musical scores
and other production  materials online
*
Applv
for performance  rights and
receive a license  via email in minutes
*
Join
the Now Published Mailing List and be
notified  by email when new plays are published



=== [PAGE 76] ===

STANDING ON CEREMOI{Y:
THEGAYMEPIAYS
by Mo Gaffney, Jordan Harrison, Moisds Kaufman,
Neil LaBute, 'Wendy Macleod, Josd Rivera,
Paul Rudnick, Doug \Wright
conceived by Brian Shnipper

3M, 3\7 (doubling, flexible casting)

Two little words, and suddenly  your whole world changes. An A-list lineup
of writers offers unique takes on the moments before, during, and after "l
do." \Witry warm, and occasionally  wacky, these plays are vows to the blessings
of equaliry the universal  challenges  of relationships,  and the often hilarious
power of love.

"CEREMONY puts a human  face on a hot-button issue and deliuers laughter
and tears rather than propaganda. 
Bacftstage

'All you haue to do is listen, shed an occasional tear and laugh a lot. There is
somethingfor euerybody ... STANDING ON CEREMONY holds a magnrfiing
glass to the highs and l.ows, joys andfearl courage andsilliness, ofp*pl, buching
trends and making history. It's afne euening, ,r*,,b:{((?!:(observer

'A 
feel-good show celebrating  gay marriage. The unifiiing theme of same+ex
marriage giues this collection  its strong idrntity. The indiuidual pkys don't share
tlte same perspectiue  or speak in the same uoice. Which heeps things interesting."

-Yariety

ISBN 978-0 -8222-2654-3

DRAMATISTS PLAY SERVICE, INC.

Iil1lilililililililffi[ilil  ilffiilffiilil



=== [PAGE 77] ===



=== [PAGE 78] ===

